Title: PILAR: A Page-Grounded Unified Evidence Representation via an Entity-Linked Assertion Graph for Open-Domain QA Agents over Multimodal Document Corpora

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.32895v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 01:24:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
## PILAR: A Page-Grounded Unified Evidence Representation via an Entity-Linked Assertion Graph for Open-Domain QA Agents over Multimodal Document Corpora 

Joongmin Shin 1 Gyuho Shim 1 Jung-hun Lee 2* Jaehyung Seo 3* 

> 1

Korea University 

> 2

Korea Maritime and Ocean University 

> 3

Konkuk University 

{tlswndals13,gjshim}@korea.ac.kr it_leejh@kmou.ac.kr seojae777@konkuk.ac.kr 

> *

Corresponding authors 

Abstract 

Open-domain question answering (ODQA) over multimodal document corpora requires linking evidence scattered across text, tables, and figures. Existing systems often store these sources separately or retrieve only coarse pages, which weakens global evidence link-ing. We present PILAR , a page-grounded unified evidence representation instantiated as an entity-linked assertion graph. PILAR 

maps sentence-, table-, and figure-derived facts into a common assertion space and uses the graph as a controlled linking layer over ro-bust page retrieval. In a shared-reader eval-uation with four agent frameworks, fourteen re-trieval backends, and two benchmarks, PILAR 

achieves the best end-to-end EM/ANLS. Gains are largest on compositional, cross-document, and multimodal questions, with a single-shot improvement of +1.6 EM over flat retrieval, rising to +2.9 on compositional and +5.9 on 3-hop questions. Ablations show that current gains are driven mainly by the text-instantiated slice of the framework, while visual assertions help only after locality-aware filtering. We therefore position PILAR as a unified evi-dence representation for multimodal ODQA rather than a standalone visual-reasoning mod-ule. Code is available at https://github. com/ShinJM-maker/PILAR .

1 Introduction 

Open-domain question answering (ODQA) over multimodal document corpora is a retrieve-and-read problem in which systems must combine evi-dence spread across text, tables, and figures (Gao et al., 2024; Cho et al., 2025; Tito et al., 2023). In the agentic setting we study, this requires more than retrieving relevant pages: the system must also con-nect related facts across documents and modalities while preserving the local grounding needed for reliable answer generation. As a result, the central challenge is not only page retrieval, but also how heterogeneous evidence is represented once it is retrieved. Recent LLM-based QA agents (Yao et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024) increase this need for a shared evidence representation that supports repeated query reformulation, evidence aggrega-tion, and cross-page linking. A useful representa-tion must preserve page-level locality for ground-ing, while also exposing higher-level connections among entities, assertions, and support evidence across documents. However, under matched evalu-ation, it remains unclear which kinds of structured evidence representations actually help multimodal ODQA agents, and whether gains come from text-derived structure, visual assertions, locality-aware ranking, or some combination of them. For brevity, we refer to the table-/figure-derived branch as vi-sual assertions in the ablation analysis. Existing approaches have complementary but incomplete strengths. Flat-chunk and page-level retrievers (Faysse et al., 2025; Cho et al., 2025) pre-serve document content, but they leave evidence as unstructured chunks or coarse pages. Text-only knowledge graphs (Edge et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025) add useful entity–relation structure, but they exclude table- and figure-derived evi-dence from the same representational space. VLM-augmented page retrieval (Jain et al., 2025) adds vi-sual semantics through free-form descriptions, but these descriptions are not entity-linked or predicate-normalized, making cross-document graph traver-sal difficult. What is still missing is a unified rep-resentation that converts text, table, and figure ev-idence into the same structured assertion space, links them in a single entity-linked graph, and ex-poses them through a page-grounded interface for ODQA agents. 

Running example. Consider a toy question: At 

5◦C, what charging current should BatteryPack-A use? A sentence in Doc 1 states that cold-start arXiv:2609.32895v1 [cs.IR] 26 Sep 2026 Query                

> At 5◦C, what charging current should BatteryPack-A use?
> BatteryPack-A
> canonical entity
> Sentence assertion
> temp <10 ◦C
> ⇒cold-start mode
> Support
> Doc 1, p.3 sentence span + section header
> Table assertion
> BatteryPack-A: nominal = 4A; reduced = 2A
> Support
> Doc 1, p.3 table cell model-specific settings
> Caption assertion
> cold-start mode ⇒
> use reduced current
> Support
> Doc 2, p.1 figure caption operating rule
> Page-grounded evidence packet
> 5◦C⇒cold-start mode |BatteryPack-A: nominal 4A / reduced 2A |use reduced current ⇒2A
> scope spec exception

Figure 1: Running example of PILAR . A sentence defines when cold-start mode applies, a table lists the model-specific charging settings for BatteryPack-A, and a figure caption in a second document specifies that cold-start operation uses the reduced current. PILAR links these supports through the canonical entity BatteryPack-A and returns one page-grounded evidence packet that preserves both cross-document linking and local ground-ing. 

mode applies below 10 ◦C. A table on the same page lists model-specific charging settings and gives 

BatteryPack-A: nominal current = 4A, reduced cur-rent = 2A . A figure caption in Doc 2 states that 

in cold-start mode, the reduced current should be used to avoid cell damage . PILAR maps these sentence-, table-, and figure-derived facts into one page-grounded assertion neighborhood centered on the canonical entity BatteryPack-A : the sentence grounds the operating regime, the table enumerates the candidate settings, and the caption specifies which setting applies. Instead of handing the agent three disconnected stores, PILAR returns one page-grounded evidence packet that preserves both the local supports and the cross-document link needed to recover the correct answer, 2A . Figure 1 visual-izes this neighborhood. To address this gap, we present PILAR . PILAR 

is a page-grounded unified evidence representation, instantiated as an entity-linked assertion graph and used as a controlled linking layer over robust page retrieval for open-domain QA agents over multi-modal document corpora. PILAR maps sentence-, table-, and figure-derived facts into a shared entity-linked assertion graph, while retaining the page-anchored support objects that license each asser-tion. In this design, the graph complements rather than replaces the base retriever, enabling global evidence linking across documents and modalities within a single page-grounded representation. In a shared-reader evaluation across four agent fam-ilies and two benchmarks, PILAR achieves the strongest end-to-end EM/ANLS among the com-pared systems, with the largest gains on composi-tional, cross-document, and multimodal questions. A strict matched-interface ablation further shows that the current gains are driven mainly by the text-instantiated slice of the framework, while visual assertions contribute conditionally after locality-aware filtering. We therefore view PILAR not as a visual-assertion-first system, but as a unified multi-modal evidence framework whose benefits grow as QA requires linking dispersed support while pre-serving local grounding. 

Contributions. 

• PILAR: We introduce PILAR , a page-grounded unified evidence representation for open-domain QA agents over multimodal document corpora. 

PILAR maps sentence-, table-, and figure-derived evidence into a shared structured asser-tion space while preserving page-anchored sup-port and provenance. • Entity-Linked Assertion Graph as a Con-trolled Linking Layer: We instantiate this rep-resentation as an entity-linked assertion graph and use it as a controlled linking layer over ro-bust page retrieval. This design enables cross-document and cross-modal evidence linking with-out replacing a strong page retriever or sacrificing local grounding. • Strong End-to-End Gains Where Evidence Linking Matters: In a shared-reader evaluation across four agent frameworks, fourteen retrieval backends, and two benchmarks, PILAR achieves the best end-to-end EM/ANLS. In the single-shot setting, it improves EM by +1.6 over flat retrieval overall, with larger gains of +2.9 on composi-tional questions and +5.9 on 3-hop questions. • Mechanistic Diagnosis of What Drives the Gains: Matched-interface ablations show that the current gains are driven mainly by the text-instantiated slice of PILAR , while table-and figure-derived assertions help after locality-aware filtering. This clarifies both where the framework is already effective and what bottle-necks remain. 

2 Related Work 

Prior work on ODQA over multimodal docu-ment corpora differs mainly in its retrieval unit Offline construction Online use PDF corpus Page parsing 

> text blocks, tables, figures, captions
> Text assertions
> LLM-assisted
> Table / Figure assertions
> VLM-assisted + QC
> Unified assertion space
> same (s, p, o) schema for all modalities

PILAR           

> page-grounded unified evidence representation
> Entity Assertion Support Provenance Doc A Doc B
> subject_of supports grounded_to
> Entity
> A₁
> Entity
> A₂
> A₁causes A ₂A₂affects X Text §2.1
> sentence
> Table 1
> cells
> §3 text
> span
> p.3 §2.1
> bbox
> p.5 tbl
> cell_ids
> p.8
> bbox
> Entity
> B₁
> Entity
> B₂
> B₁treats B ₂B₁in Fig.3
> vis
> Text §1.3
> sentence
> Figure 3
> crop
> Caption
> fig cap
> p.2 §1.3
> bbox
> p.7 fig3
> bbox
> p.7 cap
> text
> same_as Pages = grounding unit · Graph = linking unit
> text-derived visual-derived cross-doc link
> Query Robust page retrieval
> page shortlist
> Controlled graph linking
> PILAR supports controlled linking
> Page-grounded evidence packet
> pages + linked supports + provenance
> Downstream QA agent
> single-shot or iterative Answer
> re-query

Figure 2: Overview of PILAR . Offline (left), PDFs are parsed into page-anchored units, and text-, table-, and figure-derived facts are mapped into a unified assertion space to build PILAR , a page-grounded unified evidence representation. The graph organizes evidence into entity, assertion, support, and provenance layers, with cross-document entity bridges enabling global evidence linking while page-level provenance preserves local grounding (center). At query time (right), a robust page retriever produces candidate pages, and PILAR is used as a controlled linking layer. The system returns a page-grounded evidence packet to a downstream QA agent, which can answer directly or issue a follow-up query. 

and evidence representation. Chunk-based and structure-aware methods improve granularity by indexing text chunks, structural sections, or sum-mary trees (Gao et al., 2024; Duarte et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Yepes et al., 2024; Shin et al., 2025; Sarthi et al., 2024). Text-centric graph meth-ods add global structure through chunk-link or entity–relation graphs, but they remain primarily text-derived (Liu et al., 2025; Edge et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025). Page-level multimodal retrievers instead preserve local visual grounding by retriev-ing whole pages or page-image representations, sometimes with VLM-generated page descriptions or page-graph expansion (Cho et al., 2025; Tanaka et al., 2025; Faysse et al., 2025; Jain et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025). These families provide comple-mentary strengths, but each leaves part of the repre-sentation problem unresolved; Appendix A sharp-ens this positioning with a method-level summary. The common limitation is that text, table, and figure evidence are usually not expressed in the same structured space. Chunk-based methods re-main locally fragmented, page-based multimodal methods stay coarse under limited context budgets, and text-only graph methods exclude non-text evi-dence from the same evidence object. PILAR is de-signed to fill this gap: it is a page-grounded unified evidence representation, instantiated as an entity-linked assertion graph, that links sentence-, table-, and figure-derived evidence while preserving page-level provenance for downstream QA agents. 

Method family Shared space Page grounding Linking layer 

Chunk / structure-aware ✗ ✗ ✗

Text-centric graph ✗ ✗ ✓

Page-level multimodal ✗ ✓ ✗

PILAR ✓ ✓ ✓

Table 1: Why PILAR is different. Prior families satisfy only part of the design goal: chunk methods improve granularity, text-centric graph methods add global struc-ture, and page-level multimodal methods preserve local grounding. PILAR combines all three in one page-grounded unified evidence representation. 

Table 1 summarizes the central design claim of 

PILAR : unlike prior families, it unifies text-, table-, and figure-derived evidence in the same assertion space while preserving page-grounded support and using graph structure only as a controlled linking layer over robust page retrieval. 

Design takeaway. PILAR is built around a sim-ple separation of roles: pages are the grounding unit, while the entity-linked assertion graph is the linking unit. This lets the system connect sentence-, table-, and figure-derived evidence across docu-ments without replacing a strong page retriever or losing local support. The empirical pattern in our results matches this design: gains are concentrated on compositional, cross-document, and multimodal questions, while the main remaining bottlenecks lie in base page recall and reader capacity. 

3 PILAR: Page-grounded Integrated Linked-Assertion Representation 

We present PILAR (Page-grounded Integrated Linked-Assertion Representation ), a page-grounded unified evidence representation via an entity-linked assertion graph for open-domain QA agents over multimodal document corpora. The key idea is to convert sentence-, table-, and figure-derived evidence into the same structured assertion space, so that heterogeneous evidence can be linked through shared entities and nor-malized predicates rather than stored in separate modality-specific indexes. At the same time, each assertion remains tied to page-grounded support, including the original text span, table region, figure crop, or caption that licenses it. 

PILAR is agent-compatible: it exposes the same page-grounded evidence packet interface to downstream QA agents, while planning and action policies remain outside the framework. This design lets PILAR support global evidence linking across documents and modalities while preserving the local grounding needed for reliable answer generation. 

3.1 System Overview PILAR follows a four-stage pipeline that separates evidence extraction, graph construction, retrieval, and answer packaging. First, each PDF is parsed into page-anchored units such as text blocks, ta-bles, figures, and captions, and a lightweight hi-erarchy parser assigns each unit a section path. Second, the system converts these heterogeneous units into a unified entity-linked assertion graph in which text-, table-, and figure-derived facts share the same schema and can be connected through canonical entities. Third, at query time, a stan-dard page retriever produces an initial shortlist, and the graph is used as a controlled linking layer for cross-document and cross-modal evidence link-ing. Finally, the system assembles a compact page-grounded evidence packet and passes it to the reader. From the agent’s perspective, PILAR acts as a retrieval-and-packaging backend. An agent is-sues a question or follow-up query, receives a page-grounded evidence packet rather than raw graph neighborhoods or free-form summaries, and then either answers from that packet or issues another query. The same interface is reused across single-shot prompting, iterative query reformulation, and planner–executor loops; only the agent’s planning policy changes, while PILAR continues to provide the same page-grounded evidence object. A key design choice is to combine page-grounded retrieval with assertion-level evidence linking. Pages preserve the local multimodal con-text needed to interpret nearby paragraphs, tables, figures, and captions together, while the assertion graph provides the finer semantic structure needed to connect related evidence across page and docu-ment boundaries. In this sense, PILAR does not replace robust page retrieval with graph traversal; it uses the graph as a controlled linking layer to unify heterogeneous evidence on top of a stable page-grounded base. 

3.2 Shared Assertion Space for Text, Table, and Figure Evidence PILAR converts text, table, and figure content into the same structured assertion space. Text blocks are converted into subject–predicate–object assertions with optional qualifiers. Tables, charts, diagrams, and figures are processed with a VLM over cropped regions together with OCR and caption text, and the VLM outputs assertions in the same schema. This shared assertion space is a key differ-ence from description-based multimodal retrieval. Rather than storing free-form table or figure sum-maries, PILAR turns table- and figure-derived evi-dence into structured, entity-linked claims that can be merged with text-derived claims and traversed by the same retriever. A sentence, a table value, and a figure-derived fact about the same entity therefore become neighbors in one graph instead of isolated items in separate modality-specific stores. Because table- and figure-derived extraction is noisier than text extraction, we apply lightweight quality control before adding these assertions to the graph. We keep only assertions that are grounded in the corresponding table or figure crop and ver-ify key values against OCR or nearby text when available. Detailed prompting, normalization, and filtering rules are deferred to Appendix E. 

3.3 Unified Entity-Linked Assertion Graph 

On top of this shared assertion space, PILAR or-ganizes corpus evidence into four connected layers. The entity layer stores canonical entities and cross-document aliases. The assertion layer stores nor-malized claims in subject–predicate–object form. The support layer stores the evidence units that justify these claims, including text spans, tables, figure regions, and captions. The provenance layer records where each support comes from, such as document ID, page number, section path, and bounding box. This design separates two roles that are often conflated in document retrieval. The entity and as-sertion layers support global evidence linking : they connect semantically related evidence across the corpus. The support and provenance layers provide 

local grounding : they preserve the exact page con-text needed to verify and interpret a claim. As a result, PILAR can follow cross-document seman-tic links without losing page-level interpretability. 

3.4 Page Retrieval with Controlled Graph Expansion 

At query time, PILAR begins with a standard hy-brid page retriever: 

sbase (p, q ) = 0 .4 BM25 norm (p, q )+ 0 .6 dense( p, q ),

where q is the query and p is a candidate page. This stage provides an initial page shortlist with strong lexical and semantic coverage. The graph then acts as a controlled linking layer 

on top of this shortlist rather than replacing the base retriever. Starting from high-confidence seed pages, PILAR applies three lightweight signals. First, it favors local continuity through adjacent-page and same-section links, which helps when evidence spills across page boundaries. Second, it performs alias expansion so that alternative names of the same entity can recover supporting pages from other documents. Third, it performs graph expansion through entity–assertion–support links to recover pages that are semantically related to the query but may not be strong lexical matches on their own. A relevance gate suppresses weak expansions and prevents graph drift. Built on this design, the base retriever provides robust corpus-scale recall, while the graph im-proves evidence connectivity inside the candidate set. In practice, this lets PILAR recover cross-document and cross-modal support without sacri-ficing page-level stability. 

3.5 Page-Grounded Evidence Packet Construction 

The final step assembles a reader packet under a fixed token budget. Instead of concatenating raw pages in score order, PILAR packages page-anchored evidence neighborhoods : the selected page context together with the supporting text or visual units on that page and the minimal local scope needed to interpret them correctly, such as captions or nearby headers. This design keeps the input readable for the reader while reducing irrelevant context. Impor-tantly, the packet remains page-grounded even when retrieval uses graph links. The graph sup-plies the semantic connections across pages and documents, while the packet preserves the local ev-idence needed for verification. Operationally, this packet is the object consumed by downstream QA agents: after inspecting it, an agent may answer di-rectly or issue a refined follow-up query, in which case PILAR reruns the same retrieve–link–pack procedure and returns another packet under the same interface. Detailed scoring, thresholds, and serialization rules are provided in Appendix E.6 and Appendix G. 

4 Experiments 

We evaluate PILAR through four complementary analyses: a main comparison across agent fami-lies and retrieval backends, query-attribute local-ization, a strict matched-interface ablation, and bottleneck-oriented diagnostics. Appendix J pro-vides extended analyses on pruning, reader-family sensitivity, visual-source audits, and modality ora-cles. Unless noted otherwise, all systems share the same reader (Qwen3-VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025)) and the same evaluation protocol. 

4.1 Setup 

To ensure a fair comparison, all baselines use the same reader (Qwen3-VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025)), prompt template, and core evaluation protocol. For text-based and graph-oriented backends, we use a strict matched-interface setting in which all meth-ods share the same BM25+dense base page re-triever under one token-budgeted evaluation frame-work; page-based multimodal baselines keep their native retrieval and packaging pipelines because those components are central to their design. We evaluate on M3DocVQA (Cho et al., 2025) (2,441 questions) and Frames (Krishna et al., 2025) (824 questions), reporting EM and ANLS. The four agent frameworks are Naive RAG, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), PlanRAG (Lee et al., 2024), and Au-toGen (Wu et al., 2024). Across these agents, we M3DocVQA (EM / ANLS) Frames (EM / ANLS) Backend Naive RAG ReAct PlanRAG AutoGen Naive RAG ReAct PlanRAG AutoGen 

Text chunk-based RAG 

Flat chunk 32.0 / 34.4 31.4 / 34.1 27.4 / 29.5 31.8 / 34.5 13.8 / 16.7 11.6 / 14.5 9.1 / 11.2 13.4 / 16.6 LumberChunker 31.2 / 33.6 30.0 / 32.6 26.4 / 28.2 31.0 / 33.4 13.2 / 16.1 11.4 / 13.8 9.0 / 11.2 13.0 / 15.8 Meta Chunker 31.0 / 33.4 29.8 / 32.4 26.4 / 28.0 31.0 / 33.4 13.0 / 15.9 11.2 / 13.6 8.8 / 11.0 12.8 / 15.6 Structural chunking 30.4 / 32.8 29.2 / 31.8 25.8 / 27.6 30.2 / 32.6 12.6 / 15.4 10.8 / 13.4 8.6 / 10.8 12.4 / 15.0 

Hierarchical / structure-aware retrieval 

RAPTOR 31.4 / 33.8 30.2 / 32.8 26.6 / 28.4 31.2 / 33.6 13.0 / 15.9 11.2 / 13.8 8.8 / 11.0 12.8 / 15.6 MultiDocFusion 31.4 / 33.9 30.0 / 32.6 27.2 / 29.1 32.0 / 33.7 12.2 / 15.6 10.8 / 13.3 8.3 / 11.0 11.6 / 14.3 

Graph-augmented chunk retrieval 

HopRAG 31.6 / 34.0 30.4 / 33.0 26.8 / 28.6 31.4 / 33.8 13.2 / 16.1 11.4 / 14.0 9.0 / 11.2 13.0 / 15.8 

Entity-KG GraphRAG 

MS GraphRAG 32.2 / 34.6 29.8 / 32.5 26.6 / 28.6 31.2 / 34.0 13.6 / 16.3 11.2 / 13.8 9.3 / 11.1 13.0 / 16.0 LightRAG 31.6 / 34.2 31.0 / 33.5 26.4 / 28.5 31.6 / 34.3 12.6 / 15.5 11.4 / 13.9 9.1 / 11.4 13.6 / 16.0 

Page-level multimodal RAG 

M3DocRAG 19.0 / 25.2 16.0 / 16.6 10.0 / 12.7 19.0 / 25.2 12.0 / 16.5 4.0 / 5.3 1.0 / 3.2 11.0 / 15.2 VDocRAG 20.4 / 26.6 17.2 / 17.6 10.8 / 13.4 20.4 / 26.6 12.4 / 17.1 4.2 / 5.4 1.0 / 3.4 11.4 / 15.6 

VLM-augmented page retrieval 

SimpleDoc 24.0 / 28.7 29.0 / 33.2 20.0 / 22.9 24.0 / 29.6 13.0 / 19.5 7.0 / 14.0 6.0 / 10.7 11.0 / 18.0 

Multimodal GraphRAG 

MoLoRAG 19.4 / 25.6 16.4 / 17.0 10.4 / 13.0 19.4 / 25.6 12.2 / 16.8 4.2 / 5.5 1.2 / 3.4 11.2 / 15.4 

Page-grounded unified evidence representation (ours) 

PILAR 33.6 / 36.3 31.4 / 34.5 28.0 / 29.8 32.6 / 35.3 15.0 / 17.9 12.4 / 15.2 10.5 / 12.5 14.5 / 17.5 

Table 2: Main comparison. Fourteen backends × four agents; each cell shows EM / ANLS. All text-based and graph backends share the same BM25+dense page retriever and reader (Qwen3-VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025)); page-based multimodal methods retain their native retrieval and packing pipeline under the same reader and evaluation protocol. PILAR yields the strongest overall profile in this comparison, with the clearest gains on M3DocVQA and competitive performance on Frames; the Naive RAG gain is significant on M3DocVQA ( p = 0.048; paired approximate randomization (Yeh, 2000)), and pooling across agents remains significant ( p = 0.019). Additional ROUGE-L results and oracle analyses appear in Appendix J. 

compare fourteen retrieval backends spanning text chunking, hierarchical retrieval, graph-augmented chunk retrieval, entity-KG methods, page-level multimodal retrieval, VLM-augmented page re-trieval, multimodal page graphs, and PILAR ;full configurations appear in Appendix D.3, Ap-pendix D.2, and Appendix E.6. 

4.2 Main Comparison: Agent × Retrieval Backend 

Table 2 shows the main comparison across four agent families under the shared-reader setup. In this controlled setting, PILAR gives the best results on all M3DocVQA settings and on all Frames EM settings, while remaining competitive on Frames ANLS. The clearest gains appear on M3DocVQA. For Naive RAG on M3DocVQA, the gain is statistically significant ( ∆EM = +1.6, 

p = 0.048; ∆ANLS = +1.9, p = 0.028), and pooling across all agents is also significant ( p = 0.019). On Frames, no individual comparison reaches the sig-nificance threshold, so we treat it as a directional support-chain stress test rather than conclusive evi-dence. Average gains alone understate the value of the method. Table 3 shows that the improvements are concentrated on compositional, two-document, and multimodal questions—the cases where answer support is least likely to stay on one page and most likely to require cross-page or cross-document link-ing. This is the setting where a page-grounded unified evidence representation should help most. Table 4 then explains this pattern: under the current setup, most of the measurable gain comes from the text-instantiated slice of PILAR , while visual assertions help only when noisy expansion paths are controlled. 

4.3 Query-Attribute Localization 

Table 3 identifies the query dimensions where PI-LAR helps most. The key result is not just a higher average EM, but that the gains appear ex-actly where an entity-linked retrieval index should matter most. Relative to flat chunk retrieval, the gain grows from +1.4 EM on 1-hop queries to +1.9 on 2-hop and +5.9 on the sampled 3-hop subset, and from +1.1 on single-document to +2.9 on two-document questions. Even when measured against the strongest non-PILAR baseline per subset (Ta-ble 3, ∆best column), gains remain positive on all compositional, cross-document, and multimodal subsets. This distribution supports our main methodolog-ical claim. PILAR is not meant to improve every question equally. It helps most when answer sup-port must be assembled across pages, documents, or modalities rather than retrieved from one lo-cally matched page. Because the 1-hop and Simple buckets almost fully overlap in M3DocVQA, they should be viewed as one easy-query stratum rather than as independent evidence. The sampled 3-hop bucket shows the largest gain, but its small size means that this magnitude should be treated as sug-gestive rather than definitive. 

4.4 Strict Matched-Interface Ablation 

Table 4 reports the main matched-interface abla-tion in the single-shot M3DocVQA setting. All rows use the same reader, prompt, packet budget, and evaluation split; only the retrieval architecture and lightweight reranking components change. The largest single gain comes from the text-only slice of 

PILAR (+1.2 EM over page-only retrieval). Visual assertions are slightly harmful when added without locality-aware filtering (-0.4 EM). Adding the local-ity prior before the text-only slice also lowers EM slightly (33.2 → 33.0), because the adjacent-page bonus can push a more relevant graph-retrieved page out of the fixed-budget packet. This shows that locality is a noisy prior whose value depends on what it interacts with. When paired with vi-sual assertions, however, the same prior constrains noisy visual expansion paths, recovers +0.4 EM (33.0 → 33.4), and helps the full system reach the best overall score (33.6). Paired significance test-ing shows that the full pipeline significantly outper-forms page-only retrieval ( ∆EM = +1.6, p = 0.048; 

∆ANLS = +1.9, p = 0.028). Because the intermedi-ate ablation variants are not individually significant, the components appear to interact synergistically rather than contributing purely additive gains (full table in Appendix I). Overall, we interpret PILAR 

primarily as a page-grounded unified evidence rep-resentation whose current gains are driven by its text-instantiated slice, with visual assertions acting as conditional entity-linking cues that help only when locality-aware filtering removes noisy expan-sions. 

4.5 Bottleneck-Oriented Diagnostics 

Gold-page oracle analysis shows substantial re-maining headroom: replacing retrieved context with gold-page text raises EM from 33.6 to 42.4 (+8.8 pp), while adding adjacent pages gives no further benefit. Stage-loss controls point to the same bottleneck: base recall dominates the remain-ing error (R0+R1=23.4%), reranking contributes additional loss (R2=12.6%), and packet serializa-tion adds essentially none (R3=0). We therefore interpret locality and graph priors as evidence-ranking signals rather than guarantees of gold-page preservation. Full oracle tables, stage-loss anal-yses, and modality-specific diagnostics appear in Appendix J. Taken together, the main comparison, query-attribute analysis, and strict ablations support a precise interpretation of PILAR . Its main contri-bution is a page-grounded unified evidence repre-sentation, not a claim that visual assertions alone already drive the gains. Under the current setup, most measurable improvement comes from the text-instantiated slice of the framework, while vi-sual assertions are noisy in isolation and become helpful only after locality-aware filtering. The strongest gains therefore appear exactly where cross-document or cross-modal evidence must be linked under one shared assertion space. 

5 Conclusion 

PILAR is a page-grounded unified evidence repre-sentation, instantiated as an entity-linked assertion graph and used as a controlled linking layer over ro-bust page retrieval for open-domain QA agents over multimodal document corpora. The central idea is to map sentence-, table-, and figure-derived evi-dence into the same entity-linked assertion space, so that cross-document and cross-modal support can be linked within one page-grounded represen-By Hop Count & Question Type By Document Count & Modality 

Subset % PILAR Flat Best-other ∆best Subset % PILAR Flat Best-other ∆best 

1-hop 61.8 42.2 40.8 41.4 G +0.8 1 document 34.6 40.9 39.8 40.4 G +0.5 

2-hop 31.3 16.1 14.2 14.9 G +1.2 2 documents 56.8 31.7 28.8 29.5 G +2.2 

3-hop † 6.9 41.2 35.3 35.9 G +5.3 

Simple 61.8 42.2 40.8 41.4 G +0.8 Text-only 31.1 59.1 57.1 57.8 L +1.3 

Compose 28.1 15.1 12.2 12.2 F +2.9 Multi-modal 39.2 20.1 18.0 18.7 G +1.4 

Compare † 7.9 35.9 33.3 33.3 F +2.6 

Table 3: Query-attribute localization (EM, Naive RAG, M3DocVQA). ∆best = PILAR − best non-PILAR 

baseline. Superscripts: G MS GraphRAG, L LightRAG, F Flat chunk. Even against the strongest competitor in each subset, PILAR shows consistent gains on compositional (+2.9), two-document (+2.2), and multi-modal (+1.4) questions. This pattern matches the intended role of an entity-linked graph, which should help most when answer support must be linked across multiple pages or documents rather than retrieved locally. †Small buckets; interpret cautiously. Percentages may not sum to 100% (minor categories omitted).                                                           

> Components Answer Quality Variant Local Text slice Visual Gate EM ANLS ROUGE-L
> Page-level baselines
> Page-only retrieval ✗✗✗✗32.0 34.4 37.3 Page-only + local prior ✓✗✗✗32.4 35.6 38.6
> + PILAR text-only slice
> PILAR (text-only slice) ✗✓✗✗33.2 36.1 38.9 PILAR (text-only) + local ✓✓✗✗33.0 36.1 39.0
> + Visual assertions
> PILAR (text+visual slice) ✗✓✓✗32.8 35.6 38.2 PILAR (text+visual) + local ✓✓✓✗33.4 36.1 38.9
> Final (+ gate) ✓✓✓✓33.6 36.3 39.1

Table 4: Strict matched-interface ablation. All rows share the same reader, prompt, packet budget, and eval-uation split. The text-only slice of PILAR provides the largest single gain (+1.2 EM over page-only). Visual assertions hurt in isolation but recover +0.4 EM once locality-aware filtering is added. 

tation without sacrificing local grounding. Empir-ically, PILAR delivers the strongest end-to-end performance in our shared-reader setting, with the clearest gains on compositional, cross-document, and multimodal questions, where evidence linking rather than shallow local matching is the main diffi-culty. At the same time, our ablations show that the current improvements are driven mainly by the text-instantiated slice of the framework, while visual assertions remain conditionally useful after locality-aware filtering. We therefore view the main con-tribution of this paper as a page-grounded unified evidence representation whose present gains come from a strong text-derived backbone, and whose longer-term promise is to absorb richer visual as-sertions into the same representation. The main remaining bottlenecks are base page recall, support-chain recovery, and reader capacity, suggesting that the next gains will come less from adding graph complexity than from improving the retriever and reader around this page-grounded unified evidence representation. 

Limitations 

Several subgroup analyses use relatively small query buckets, so they should be interpreted with caution. On M3DocVQA, the full pipeline improves significantly over page-only retrieval (p = 0.048), but the intermediate ablation variants are not individually significant. We therefore view the component-level decomposition as informative but not fully confirmatory on its own. The small and interaction-dependent gains from visual asser-tions let us reject a visual-assertion-first interpre-tation, but they do not show how widely this inter-action pattern will generalize to other datasets or new agent architectures. On Frames, no individual comparison is statistically significant, likely be-cause of limited power ( n = 824, base EM ≈ 10%). In addition, although our backend transfers across agent frameworks at the interface level, the best retrieval hyperparameters are less stable; settings tuned for single-shot use do not always transfer well to multi-step agents. Our modality-specific conclusions are also tied to the tested pipeline and model family: at the 8B scale, OCR text clearly outperforms raw page images, although stronger and better-tuned VLMs may change this result. Fi-nally, the Frames stress test shows that our current objective favors evidence aggregation more than strict reconstruction of long support chains. Fur-ther gains in that regime may require a different retrieval objective rather than more tuning of the current retrieval stack. Acknowledgments 

This work was partly supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Plan-ning & Evaluation (IITP, AI Computing Support Project for R&D) grant funded by the Korea gov-ernment(MSIT) (High-Performance Research AI Computing Infrastructure Support at the 2 PFLOPS Scale, Project Number: RS-2026-25505492, Con-tribution Rate: 25%) and This research was sup-ported by Culture, Sports and Tourism R&D Pro-gram, funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, through the Korea Culture Technology Planning and Evaluation Institute, an affilated insti-tute of the Korea Creative Content Agency grant in 2026 (Project Name: Development of an AI Agent Integrating Korean Language Knowledge for Per-sonalized Language Consultation Services, Project Number: RS-2026-25506607, Contribution Rate: 25%) and This work was supported by the Insti-tute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (IITP-2026-RS-2026-25615817, AI Star Fellowship Support Program) and This work was supported by the National IT Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (S1301-26-1007, Development of AI-Based Advanced Static Analy-sis and Automatic Generation of Software Quality Reports for Weapon Systems). 

References 

Shuai Bai et al. 2025. Qwen3-VL technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with im-proved correlation with human judgments. In Pro-ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Ex-trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization , pages 65–72. Ali Furkan Biten, Ruben Tito, Andres Mafla, Lluis Gomez, Marcal Rusinol, Ernest Valveny, C. V. Jawa-har, and Dimosthenis Karatzas. 2019. Scene text visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 4291–4301. Jaemin Cho, Debanjan Mahata, Ozan Irsoy, Yujie He, and Mohit Bansal. 2025. M3DocVQA: Multi-modal multi-page multi-document understanding. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops , pages 6178– 6188. André V. Duarte, João Marques, Miguel Graça, Miguel Freire, Lei Li, and Arlindo L. Oliveira. 2024. Lum-berChunker: Long-form narrative document segmen-tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17526 .Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, and Jonathan Larson. 2024. From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused summariza-tion. Preprint , arXiv:2404.16130. Manuel Faysse, Hugues Sibille, Tony Wu, Bilel Omrani, Gautier Viaud, Céline Hudelot, and Pierre Colombo. 2025. ColPali: Efficient document retrieval with vision language models. In The Thirteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations .OpenReview.net. Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng Wang, and Haofen Wang. 2024. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 .Zirui Guo, Lianghao Xia, Yanhua Yu, Tu Ao, and Chao Huang. 2025. LightRAG: Simple and fast retrieval-augmented generation. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 ,pages 10746–10761, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chelsi Jain, Yiran Wu, Yifan Zeng, Jiale Liu, Shengyu Dai, Zhenwen Shao, Qingyun Wu, and Huazheng Wang. 2025. SimpleDoc: Multi-modal document un-derstanding with dual-cue page retrieval and iterative refinement. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 28410–28427, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Satyapriya Krishna, Kalpesh Krishna, Anhad Mo-hananey, Steven Schwarcz, Adam Stambler, Shyam Upadhyay, and Manaal Faruqui. 2025. Fact, fetch, and reason: A unified evaluation of retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 4745–4759, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Myeonghwa Lee, Seonho An, and Min-Soo Kim. 2024. PlanRAG: A plan-then-retrieval augmented genera-tion for generative large language models as decision makers. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6537–6555, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summariza-tion Branches Out , pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hao Liu, Zhengren Wang, Xi Chen, Zhiyu Li, Feiyu Xiong, Qinhan Yu, and Wentao Zhang. 2025. Ho-pRAG: Multi-hop reasoning for logic-aware retrieval-augmented generation. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 1897–1913, Vienna, Austria. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Birgit Pfitzmann, Christoph Auer, Michele Dolfi, Ahmed S. Nassar, and Peter Staar. 2022. DocLayNet: A large human-annotated dataset for document-layout segmentation. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 3743–3751. Parth Sarthi, Salman Abdullah, Aditi Tuli, Shubh Khanna, Anna Goldie, and Christopher D. Man-ning. 2024. RAPTOR: Recursive abstractive pro-cessing for tree-organized retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18059 .Joongmin Shin, Chanjun Park, Jeongbae Park, Jaehyung Seo, and Heuiseok Lim. 2025. MultiDocFusion: Hi-erarchical and multimodal chunking pipeline for en-hanced RAG on long industrial documents. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 20985– 21004, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Ray Smith. 2007. An overview of the Tesseract OCR engine. In Ninth International Conference on Docu-ment Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2007) , vol-ume 2, pages 629–633. Ryota Tanaka, Taichi Iki, Taku Hasegawa, Kyosuke Nishida, Kuniko Saito, and Jun Suzuki. 2025. VDocRAG: Retrieval-augmented generation over visually-rich documents. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 24827–24837. Rubèn Tito, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and Ernest Val-veny. 2023. Hierarchical multimodal transform-ers for multi-page DocVQA. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05935 .Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2024. AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling . OpenReview.net. Xixi Wu, Yanchao Tan, Nan Hou, Ruiyang Zhang, and Hong Cheng. 2025. MoLoRAG: Bootstrapping doc-ument understanding via multi-modal logic-aware retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 14024–14045, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Alexander Yeh. 2000. More accurate tests for the statis-tical significance of result differences. In COLING 2000 Volume 2: The 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics .Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Yao You, Jan Milczek, Sebas-tian Laverde, and Renyu Li. 2024. Financial report chunking for effective retrieval augmented genera-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05131 .Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 .Jihao Zhao, Zhiyuan Ji, Yuchen Feng, Pengnian Qi, Simin Niu, Bo Tang, Feiyu Xiong, and Zhiyu Li. 2024. Meta-Chunking: Learning efficient text seg-mentation via logical perception. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12788 .

A Detailed Positioning Against Prior Work 

Table 5 sharpens the main-text Related Work by isolating the dimensions that matter most for this paper: the retrieval/evidence object, the type of global structure, whether text, table, and figure evi-dence enter the same structured space, and whether the final support object remains page-grounded. The point is not that earlier systems are uniformly weaker: chunk-based methods are often stronger at local precision, text-centric graph systems are stronger at explicit corpus-level structure, and page-level multimodal systems are stronger at preserving local visual context. The key distinction is that PI-LAR combines these desiderata in one object: a 

page-grounded unified evidence representation , in-stantiated as an entity-linked assertion graph and used as a controlled linking layer over a robust page retriever. 

How to read the difference. The practical dis-tinction is simple. Prior systems usually choose one of three anchors: chunk precision, graph struc-ture over text, or page-level visual grounding. PI-LAR is built around a different anchor: the evi-dence object itself. Its goal is to make text, table, and figure evidence first-class neighbors inside one page-grounded representation, so that a QA agent receives a compact packet of linked support rather than having to reconcile separate stores or coarse page summaries after retrieval. Family / examples Primary evidence object Global structure Shared structured space for text/table/-figure? Page-grounded support preserved? Main difference from PILAR 

Chunk / structure-aware retrieval 

Flat chunk, RAP-TOR, MultiDocFu-sion 

Chunk, section, or summary node Weak or hierarchical only Partial at best; evi-dence is still stored as text or local page frag-ments Usually partial Improves granularity, but does not build one entity-linked evidence object that normalizes sentence-, table-, and figure-derived facts across documents. Text-centric graph re-trieval 

HopRAG, MS GraphRAG, Ligh-tRAG 

Text chunk, entity, relation, or community summary Explicit graph over text-derived objects No; non-text evi-dence enters only through OCR or nearby prose Usually no Adds corpus-level structure, but the graph is still fundamentally text-instantiated and does not keep page-grounded support objects for table or figure evidence. Page-level multimodal retrieval 

M3DocRAG, VDocRAG, Col-Pali 

Whole page or page-image representation Usually none No; text and visual evidence remain bun-dled inside the page object Yes Preserves local multimodal grounding well, but stays coarse under tight budgets and does not expose assertion-level links across pages or doc-uments. VLM-augmented page retrieval 

SimpleDoc Page plus free-form VLM de-scription Implicit only No; visual evidence is verbalized as free text rather than nor-malized assertions Yes Enriches page retrieval with visual semantics, but does not convert visual evidence into canon-ical, entity-linked assertion objects. Multimodal page graph 

MoLoRAG Page node with graph expan-sion Page graph No; graph nodes remain pages rather than typed assertions Yes Adds graph expansion over pages, but the graph does not unify sentence-, table-, and figure-derived evidence in one structured assertion space. 

PILAR Page-grounded unified evi-dence representation Entity-linked assertion graph used as a controlled linking layer Yes Yes Unifies sentence, table, and figure evidence into the same assertion object while keeping the page-grounded supports that license each assertion. 

Table 5: Sharp positioning of PILAR against representative prior-work families. The comparison focuses on the design axes that matter most for this paper: what object is retrieved or expanded, where global structure lives, whether heterogeneous evidence shares one structured space, and whether final support remains page-grounded. 

Appendix 

The appendix is divided into shared evaluation infrastructure and PILAR-specific design . Part I describes the ODQA setup that is kept as fixed as possible across systems, including datasets, pre-processing, reader settings, baseline implementa-tion, evaluation protocol, and an auxiliary com-parison with strong page-level multimodal base-lines. Part II describes the components specific to 

PILAR , including structure recovery, assertion in-duction, entity–support linking, evidence packet as-sembly, qualitative evidence-linking analysis, and runtime analysis. 

B Part I: Shared ODQA Evaluation Setup — Datasets and Preprocessing 

B.1 Description-Based vs. Structured Visual Assertion 

Table 6 contrasts description-based visual integra-tion (as used in SimpleDoc and similar systems) with the structured visual assertion approach used in PILAR . The key difference is that descriptions remain unstructured text, while structured asser-tions are entity-linked, predicate-normalized graph objects. 

Property Description-based → PILAR 

Output format Free-text string → Structured JSON (S/P/O/qual-ifiers) Entity linking Not linked → Linked to canonical entity inven-tory Predicate schema Absent → Normalized to closed predicate inven-tory Graph integration Stored as text chunk → Graph node with typed edges Cross-doc traversal Not possible → Via entity-layer same_as edges Consolidation Not possible → Mergeable with text assertions sharing entities Retrieval mode Flat similarity search → Graph traversal + struc-tured scoring 

Table 6: Description-based visual integration vs. struc-tured visual assertions in PILAR .

Concrete example. Given a bar chart with caption “Figure 3: Performance comparison”: • Description-based: VLM → “The bar chart compares Model A and Model B on the F1 met-ric; Model A achieves a higher score. ” Stored as a text chunk. Cannot be linked to entity 

e_modelA or traversed structurally. • PILAR: VLM → {subject: “Model A” → e_modelA, predicate: “outperforms”, object: “Model B” → e_modelB, qualifiers: {metric: “F1”}} .The assertion becomes a graph node with 

subject_of and object_of edges to canonical entities, enabling cross-document queries like “ find all assertions about Model A across the corpus .” 

B.2 ODQA Datasets 

We retain a corpus-level ODQA setting because it provides a stable evaluation environment in which routing failure can be measured without changing the reader or the base retrievers. Unlike standard DocVQA where a single document is provided, corpus-level ODQA jointly indexes a large docu-ment collection and requires the system to identify the relevant pages from the entire corpus. 

M3DocVQA (Cho et al., 2025). M3DocVQA is our primary controlled benchmark. The benchmark mixes text, table, and image evidence and includes both single-hop and compositional cross-document cases. 

Frames (Krishna et al., 2025). Frames serves as a harder support-chain stress test. In our hop-count analysis of the evaluated split, 770/824 questions (93.5%) lie in the 2+hop regime, making the bench-mark better viewed as a support-chain recovery problem than as a precision-dominated single-hop QA setting. We therefore use Frames primarily to test whether the backend remains competitive when long support chains, rather than document-local answer support, dominate performance. 

B.3 Preprocessing Pipeline 

To ensure fair comparison, all baselines and PI-LAR use inputs produced by the same preprocess-ing pipeline. The point of this shared infrastructure is to keep document layout parsing and visual pre-processing fixed while the graph-based backend changes. 

Document layout parsing. We apply adocument-layout detector whose output classes follow the DocLayNet label space (Pfitzmann et al., 2022) to identify layout elements (Title, Header, Paragraph, Table, Figure, Caption). We use standard post-processing with a detection confidence threshold ( τdet = 0 .5) and NMS IoU threshold ( τnms = 0 .5) to filter noise.   

> 1For non-text units (e.g., figures/tables), PILAR can attach region crops and/or multimodal embeddings, while keeping each unit as a first-class node for retrieval and token-budget packing.

OCR. We use Tesseract (Smith, 2007) to perform OCR on each detected block region independently. Extracted text is lowercased, control characters are removed, and whitespace is normalized before be-ing stored as block metadata. 

C Part I: Shared ODQA Evaluation Setup — Evaluation Metrics and Protocol 

This section records the metric definitions and eval-uation protocol used throughout the paper. Keeping them unchanged isolates the contribution of the uni-fied entity-linked assertion graph from unrelated changes in scoring or evaluation design. 

Reporting Protocol (Avg@1–10). To provide a comprehensive view of ranking performance rather than cherry-picking a specific K, docu-ment retrieval results are reported as the average of the metric values calculated at each cut-off 

K ∈ { 1, . . . , 10 }.

C.1 QA Metrics 

Answer quality is evaluated after standard normal-ization (lowercasing, punctuation removal). We use EM (Exact Match), ANLS (Biten et al., 2019), ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004), and METEOR (Baner-jee and Lavie, 2005). For ANLS, we follow the threshold-based implementation standard in MP-DocVQA (Tito et al., 2023). 

C.2 Token Budget Protocol Budget Constraint. For fairness, we strictly con-trol the input context size. We include retrieved evidence units in their ranking order until the cu-mulative serialized token count reaches the budget 

Btok .

Comparison with Page-level Models. Page-embedding methods (e.g., ColPali (Faysse et al., 2025)) cannot dynamically adjust their unit size because the retrieval unit is fixed to a full page image. As a result, they are marked as Fixed in our budget-sensitivity analyses and are discussed separately as page-level retrieval baselines rather than as packet-level methods in this appendix. 

D Part I: Shared ODQA Evaluation Setup — Baseline Implementation 

For fair comparison, all baselines share the same corpus, reader, and decoding settings. In the matched-interface experiments, text-based and Method Retrieval Unit Modality Field Separation Graph Scope Flat RAG (page, text-only) Page Text Single field (page text) None Corpus-level Flat RAG (chunk, text-only) Chunk / paragraph Text Single field (chunk text) None Corpus-level Hierarchical tree retrieval (e.g., RAPTOR) Chunk / paragraph Text Single field (text unit) Summary tree Corpus-level Graph-augmented retrieval (e.g., HopRAG) Chunk / paragraph Text Single field (text unit) Similarity graph Corpus-level Entity-KG GraphRAG (e.g., MS GraphRAG) Chunk / paragraph Text Single field (text unit) Entity-relation KG Corpus-level Page-level multimodal RAG (Cho et al., 2025; Tanaka et al., 2025) Page Text + Image (page embedding) Single field (page) None Corpus-level VLM-augmented page retrieval (Jain et al., 2025) Page Text + Image (page + VLM summary) Single field (page) None Corpus-level Multimodal page-graph GraphRAG (Wu et al., 2025) Page Text + Image (page embedding) Single field (page) Page graph Corpus-level   

> PILAR (unified assertion graph) Page-anchored entity/asser-tion/sup-port unit Text + Image (region-based) 1
> Global entity field + local support field Unified entity-linked assertion graph Corpus-level

Table 7: Method taxonomy along key design axes: retrieval unit granularity, modality, field separation, graph structure, and corpus-level ODQA scope. In the PILAR framing, the table serves as a reusable comparator scaffold for flat, page-level, support-blind graph, and unified graph-based retrieval backends.               

> Statistic M3DocVQA Frames Questions 2,441 824 Primary role in this paper Controlled paired study Full-split stress test Format PDF corpus Wikipedia-style multi-hop corpus Emphasis Page-grounded evidence routing Support-chain recovery Gold evidence granularity Document/page supervision Supporting documents/pages Dominant regime Mixed, many 1-hop cases 2+hop dominated

Table 8: High-level roles of the two benchmarks used in this paper. M3DocVQA is the primary controlled bench-mark for paired backend comparison, while Frames serves as a harder full-split support-chain stress test. 

graph backends additionally share the same ini-tial page shortlist, while page-based multimodal methods retain their native page-based retrieval pipeline. Differences arise primarily from retrieval unit choice, routing strategy, and modality utiliza-tion. 

D.1 Family-level view of the compared baselines 

The sharp-positioning table above gives the high-level picture; here we keep only the family-level distinctions needed to read the experiments. 

Chunk-based and structure-aware methods 

(page text, length chunking, LumberChunker, Meta Chunker, structural chunking, MultiDocFusion) im-prove local granularity or preserve document struc-ture, but they still package evidence as chunks, sections, or local page fragments rather than as one entity-linked evidence object. Hierarchical tree retrieval (RAPTOR) adds a summary tree for multi-granularity access, but not a page-grounded assertion space. Graph-augmented chunk re-trieval (HopRAG) adds graph expansion over text chunks, but the graph remains similarity-driven rather than entity-canonicalized. Page-level mul-timodal retrieval (M3DocRAG, VDocRAG) pre-serves local visual grounding at the page level, but remains coarse under tight context budgets. Multi-modal page graphs (MoLoRAG) add page-level graph expansion, but page nodes remain the re-trieval object. VLM-augmented page retrieval 

(SimpleDoc) enriches pages with free-form descrip-tions, but those descriptions are not entity-linked assertions. These families therefore differ mainly in what object they retrieve or expand: chunk, summary, page, page graph, or free-form description. PILAR 

instead treats the evidence object itself as primary: sentence-, table-, and figure-derived facts are nor-malized into one page-grounded unified evidence representation, instantiated as an entity-linked as-sertion graph. 

D.2 Backends Compared in Table 2 

The main experiment (Table 2) compares four-teen backends spanning chunk-based retrieval, hierarchical/structure-aware retrieval, graph-augmented text retrieval, text-only KG methods, page-level multimodal retrieval, VLM-augmented page retrieval, multimodal page graphs, and 

PILAR . For the matched-interface comparisons, all text-based and graph backends operate within Method Unit Retriever Modality Hierarchy Signal Stage-1 Scope Stage-2 Scope Evidence Structure Packing under Btok                                                                                                                                

> Text chunk-based RAG
> Page (Text-only) Page Text (OCR) None NCorpus-wide None Fixed top-Kpages (page-budget) Length chunking Chunk Text (OCR) None NCorpus-wide None Greedy top-kchunks LumberChunker (Duarte et al., 2024) Chunk Text (OCR) None NCorpus-wide None Greedy top-kchunks Meta Chunker (Zhao et al., 2024) Chunk Text (OCR) None NCorpus-wide None Greedy top-kchunks Structural chunking (Yepes et al., 2024) Chunk Text (OCR) Weak (layout-based boundaries) NCorpus-wide None Greedy top-kchunks MultiDocFusion (Shin et al., 2025) Hier. chunk Text (OCR) Native / structure-aware N(no Hierarchy Field )Corpus-wide No explicit graph (chunk hierarchy only) Greedy top-kchunks (no sub-graph assembly)
> Hierarchical tree retrieval
> RAPTOR (Sarthi et al., 2024) Chunk + Summary Text Induced (summary tree) NCorpus-wide Recursive summary tree Greedy top-knodes
> Graph-augmented chunk retrieval
> HopRAG (Liu et al., 2025) Chunk Text None NCorpus-wide Chunk similarity graph (hop expansion) Greedy top-kchunks
> Entity-KG GraphRAG
> MS GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) Chunk Text None NCorpus-wide Entity-relation KG + com-munity graph Community summary retrieval LightRAG (Guo et al., 2025) Chunk Text None NCorpus-wide Entity-relation graph (dual-level) Low/high-level entity retrieval
> Page-level multimodal RAG
> M3DocRAG (Cho et al., 2025) Page Page-level MM None NCorpus-wide None Fixed top-Kpages (page-budget) VDocRAG (Tanaka et al., 2025) Page Page-level MM None NCorpus-wide None Fixed top-Kpages (page-budget)
> VLM-augmented page retrieval
> SimpleDoc (Jain et al., 2025) Page Page-level MM None NCorpus-wide None (VLM summaries for reranking) Fixed top-Kpages (page-budget)
> Multimodal GraphRAG
> MoLoRAG (Wu et al., 2025) Page Page-level MM None NCorpus-wide Page graph expansion Fixed top-Kpages (page-budget)
> PILAR Page-anchored entity/assertion/support unit Text + Visual Crop Global entity field + local support field Shared page shortlist with entity/assertion matching Graph traversal across shortlisted pages/docu-ments Unified entity-linked as-sertion graph Assertion-centered packet as-sembly

Table 9: Qualitative comparison of native retrieval framework design choices. The table summarizes each method’s design axes; in the matched-interface experiments reported in the main text, text-based and graph backends are additionally instantiated after a shared initial page shortlist. We contrast methods by retrieval unit, retriever/modality, hierarchy usage, initial search scope, expansion scope, evidence structure (none vs. graph), and packing under a token budget Btok .

the same top-40 page shortlist returned by the shared BM25+dense page retriever; page-based multimodal methods retain their native page-level pipeline and are reported as end-to-end reference points under the same reader and evaluation protocol. 

Flat chunk. Fixed-length text chunks inside the shared page shortlist; this is the non-KG lower bound. 

MS GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) and Ligh-tRAG (Guo et al., 2025). Representative text-only KG baselines. Both build graphs from text-derived entities and relations; MS GraphRAG adds community detection and summaries, while Ligh-tRAG uses a lighter dual-level retrieval scheme. Neither admits table- or figure-derived evidence as first-class assertion objects. 

MultiDocFusion (Shin et al., 2025). The strongest non-graph structure-aware multimodal baseline in our pool. It preserves native document structure and associates tables/figures with nearby text, but it does not build a corpus-level entity graph or normalize table-/figure-derived evidence into linked assertions. 

PILAR (full system). A page-grounded unified evidence representation instantiated as an entity-linked assertion graph. Text-, table-, and figure-derived facts share one schema and remain tied to page-grounded supports, enabling cross-document evidence linking under a single evidence object. See §3 for full details. 

D.3 Agent Frameworks (Table 2) 

We evaluate four agent frameworks to test whether retrieval-backend conclusions remain meaningful across agent families under a shared backend inter-face. Appendix D.4 later shows that the backend transfers at the interface level, but retrieval hyper-parameters do not transfer uniformly. 

Naive RAG. Single-step retrieve-then-read. Given a query, the agent retrieves the top-K

evidence units from the configured retrieval backend, concatenates them into a context window, and passes them to the reader (Qwen3-VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025)) in one shot. This tests raw retrieval quality without any multi-step reasoning. 

ReAct (Yao et al., 2023). The agent interleaves 

reasoning (thinking about what information is needed) and action (querying the retrieval back-end) steps in a loop. At each step, the agent decides whether to query the retrieval backend for more ev-idence or to produce a final answer based on accu-mulated evidence. This tests whether the backend supports iterative exploration; for graph-structured backends, entity links and typed assertions may enable multi-hop reasoning more effectively than flat chunks. 

PlanRAG (Lee et al., 2024). The agent first gen-erates an explicit retrieval plan —a sequence of sub-queries specifying which entities, relations, or evi-dence types to retrieve—and then executes the plan against the retrieval backend. This is especially informative for structured backends: an agent can plan to “first find entity X, then retrieve its visual assertions about metric Y” only when the backend exposes structured entity–assertion–support paths. 

AutoGen (Wu et al., 2024). A multi-agent con-versation framework where multiple specialized agents collaborate through dialogue to solve a task. We configure a retriever agent (queries the retrieval backend) and a reasoner agent (synthesizes evi-dence and produces the answer). The agents en-gage in multi-turn conversation, with the retriever agent iteratively fetching evidence from the back-end based on the reasoner’s requests. This tests whether the configured backend supports collabo-rative multi-agent exploration; for graph-structured backends, entity links and typed assertions may al-low the retriever agent to respond more effectively to progressively refined requests from the reasoner agent. 

D.4 Transfer of Retrieval Hyperparameters Across Agent Families 

The single-shot tuned setting used in the single-shot bottleneck analyses narrows the candidate pool ( initial_multiplier =2) and removes the same-section bonus. A transfer study on M3DocVQA shows that this tuned setting does not uniformly carry over to multi-step agents.                

> Agent Default EM Tuned EM ∆
> Naive RAG 32.0 33.6 +1.6 ReAct 31.4 31.4 +0.0 PlanRAG 27.8 28.0 +0.2 AutoGen 33.0 32.6 -0.4
> Table 10: Transfer of the single-shot tuned configura-tion across agent families (M3DocVQA). The tuned setting is clearly beneficial for Naive RAG, marginal for PlanRAG, neutral for ReAct, and slightly harmful for AutoGen.

A follow-up 2 × 2 sweep over 

initial_multiplier ∈ {2, 3} and 

same_section_bonus ∈ {0, 0.015 } iso-lates the transfer effect. The same-section bonus is negligible throughout (differences below 0.1 EM), matching the single-shot factorial analysis. Pool size is more informative: ReAct remains effectively insensitive (31.4–31.6 EM), while AutoGen mildly prefers the broader default pool (32.8–33.0 under multiplier=3 vs. 32.6 under multiplier=2). We therefore treat it as a single-shot tuned configuration rather than a universal backend default. 

E Additional Method Details 

This appendix provides implementation details for the unified entity-linked assertion graph construc-tion and retrieval pipeline used in PILAR .

E.1 Document Parsing and Page Anchoring 

Each PDF is first parsed into page-level blocks using PyMuPDF. We extract text blocks, tables, figures, and captions, and classify them with lightweight layout cues. A stack-based document hierarchy parser then reconstructs section structure and assigns each block a section_path . These page-anchored units form the support candidates used by the downstream graph. 

E.2 Entity Linking and Cross-Document Canonicalization 

To build the global entity layer, we harvest candi-date mentions from body text, table headers, cap-tions, and OCR-visible figure regions. Lexical vari-ants are normalized with alias tables and rewrite rules, and mentions are linked to canonical entities when the linking confidence exceeds a threshold. Cross-document same_as edges are added when two mentions share the same canonical ID or when alias overlap, type compatibility, and descriptor similarity jointly indicate that they refer to the same entity. 

E.3 Structured Visual Assertion Extraction 

For each table or figure, we send the image crop, OCR text, and caption to a VLM and request structured JSON assertions. The output contains fields such as subject, predicate, object, grounding status, and visual evidence. Unlike description-based pipelines, these outputs are inserted directly into the shared assertion schema used by the text branch. 

E.4 Quality Control for Visual Assertions 

We apply two-stage filtering before visual asser-tions are added to the graph. In Stage 1, assertions marked as not visually grounded are discarded. In Stage 2, key entities and values are checked against OCR text, captions, or nearby section text when available. Accepted assertions are then normal-ized to the shared predicate inventory and linked to the same canonical entity space as text-derived assertions. 

E.5 Graph Assembly 

The final graph contains four node types: entities, assertions, support units, and provenance nodes. Entity–assertion edges encode semantic participa-tion, assertion–support edges encode evidence sup-port, and support–provenance edges preserve exact location. Additional cross-document same_as 

edges allow retrieval to connect equivalent entities across documents. 

E.6 Retrieval Scoring Details Base page retrieval. All matched-interface text-based and graph backends share the same page-level base retriever. For each query q and page p,we compute 

sbase (p, q ) = 0 .4 BM25 norm (p, q )+ 0 .6 dense( p, q ).

The retriever keeps the top-40 pages as the initial shortlist. 

Seed selection. Graph expansion starts from high-confidence seed pages selected from the short-list. In the current system, a page is treated as a seed if its score is within a fixed ratio of the best base-retrieval score. 

Local continuity prior. To recover evidence that spills across page boundaries, we apply small bonuses to adjacent pages and to pages that remain in the same section path. These priors are delib-erately lightweight so that they refine the shortlist rather than replace the base retriever. 

Alias and graph expansion. The retriever next performs two expansion steps. Alias expansion follows canonical entity aliases to recover cross-document pages that mention the same entity under different surface forms. Graph expansion traverses entity–assertion–support links to recover pages con-nected to matched assertions or their supporting evidence. 

Expansion gate. To prevent drift, expanded pages are retained only when they remain relevant under the base retriever. This gate filters weak graph paths and is especially important for control-ling noisy visual assertions. 

Implementation constants. In the best single-shot configuration used in this paper, the system applies an adjacent-page bonus of +0 .04 , a same-section bonus of +0 .015 , an alias-expansion bonus of +0 .12 , a graph-expansion bonus of +0 .08 , and a dense-score gate of 0.35 for accepting expanded pages. 

E.7 Support Objects and Provenance 

Support nodes (text spans, table cells, figure re-gions, captions, footnotes) carry explicit support roles: primary, contextual, scope, or exception. Each support is tied to local provenance (page, bounding box, cell ID, section path). Provenance edges control graph expansion to prevent drift into weakly grounded neighborhoods. 

F Part II: PILAR-Specific Infrastructure — Local Scope, Provenance, and Document Descriptors 

This section details the structural preprocessing reused inside PILAR : document structure parsing, scope-path extraction, and practical descriptor con-struction. In the PILAR framing, these components are supporting infrastructure for local grounding rather than the main source of novelty. 

Role in PILAR. PILAR uses upstream structure recovery only to obtain local scope and provenance anchors from raw PDFs. Given a document d, this step produces section paths and governing headers that attach supports to the right local scope. In our framing, these signals are supportive rather than central: they align local supports with assertions, while the main contribution lies in coupling those supports to a corpus-level entity layer. 

Model and outputs. We implement the structure parser with a layout-aware model that operates on page-level blocks and predicts parent–child rela-tions to reconstruct T (d), while also identifying block types and span boundaries required by down-stream indexing. All retrieval experiments in this paper use the same fixed checkpoint; the parser is not tuned on ODQA benchmarks, ensuring that downstream gains are attributable to the graph and retrieval design rather than task-specific retraining of the parser. 

F.1 Section-path Extraction Governing Header. For each evidence unit (block) c, we traverse upward in the recovered tree 

T (d) and select the nearest Title or Section Header ancestor as its governing header . In PI-LAR , this header is stored as a local scope carrier rather than as the primary retrieval object. 

Section Path. Using the header sequence from the document root to the governing header, we construct the section path:       

> section_path (c) = Title >Sec >Subsec > . . .

This path is stored as structural metadata and is utilized as a key feature for local scope assignment and graph traversal. 

F.2 Support Linking and Cross-Unit Association in the Assertion Graph 

The shared evaluation setup does not predict a fully separate cross-block link graph beyond the recov-ered document structure. In PILAR , this motivates representing local assertion-support clusters and then attaching them to corpus-level entity anchors instead of depending on an unrestricted global link predictor. In our pipeline, the structure parser is used to reconstruct the parent–child hierarchy T (d)

and to provide section paths and governing headers for local scope assignment. All cross-unit associa-tion needed for ODQA is handled deterministically at packing time via the packing policy described below. 

F.3 Semantic Associate Mining for Evidence Packet Expansion 

For each Stage-2 anchor unit ci, we mine Semantic Associates by ranking other units within the same document using a similarity function Sim (ci, ·)

computed from precomputed dense embeddings: text embeddings for textual units, and visual em-beddings for table/figure crops. During packet as-sembly, we add high-similarity visual units as Se-mantic Associates subject to the token budget, and attach the required scope carriers from the struc-ture tree to keep each added unit interpretable in its original section context. 

G Part II: PILAR-Specific Retrieval and Packaging — Assertion-Centered Evidence Packaging 

This section describes the PILAR-specific packeti-zation policy used to assemble the final multimodal context under a strict token budget Btok . Packet as-sembly exposes both cross-page semantic links and the local support structure needed by the reader. 

G.1 Evidence Packet Serialization and Budgeting 

The final reader context is assembled from page-anchored evidence neighborhoods rather than raw pages alone. For each selected anchor page, we preserve the local page text and add the support metadata needed to interpret it correctly, includ-ing page number, section path, support type, and optional visual crops for tables and figures. We use a fixed reader budget of 4,500 tokens. In the best single-shot setting, approximately 70% of the budget is reserved for base-retrieval pages and 30% for expanded pages, with at most two expanded pages added to the packet. This policy keeps the packet dominated by high-relevance page context while still allowing the graph to contribute complementary evidence. 

G.2 Evidence Packet Assembly Procedure 

Unlike naive greedy packing, our strategy prior-itizes evidence completeness. We include high-scoring anchor pages first, attach the scope carri-ers needed to interpret them, and then add same-assertion, same-entity, or highly related support neighbors as long as the token budget allows. 

Implementation note. Token counting is per-formed using the specific tokenizer of the reader model (Qwen3-VL (Bai et al., 2025)). Image crops are assigned a fixed token cost corresponding to the vision encoder budget, and the number of in-serted images is capped to stay within the reader’s multimodal input limit. 

H Part I: Shared ODQA Evaluation Setup — Reader and Retrieval Settings 

This section provides detailed experimental settings (retriever, reader, and hyperparameters) to ensure reproducibility. All experiments are implemented using PyTorch and HuggingFace Transformers. Algorithm 1 Page-grounded evidence-packet as-sembly. The packet builder combines entity an-chors, assertion neighborhoods, and primary/con-text/scope supports into the reader-facing context used by PILAR .

Require: Stage-2 ranked anchors {(ci, s i)}Ni=1 , parsed sec-tion tree T (d), semantic similarity function Sim (·, ·),token budget Btok 

Ensure: Evidence subgraph S

1: S ← ∅ , C ← 0 ▷ C : current accumulated token count 2: for i = 1 to N do 

3: Phase 1: Anchor & scope 4: ∆anc ← tokens for unit ci + scope context 5: if C + ∆ anc > B tok then continue 6: end if 

7: Add ci and scope context to S; C ← C + ∆ anc 

8: Phase 2: local support completion 9: N eighbors ← units sharing assertion/entity/scope links with ci

10: for s ∈ N eighbors do 

11: ∆nbr ← tokens for s

12: if C + ∆ nbr ≤ Btok and s / ∈ S then 

13: Add s to S; C ← C + ∆ nbr 

14: end if 

15: end for 

16: Phase 3: semantic associate packing 17: Candidates ← Top-M units by Sim (ci, ·) from the same document 18: for m ∈ Candidates do 

19: if m is a useful visual/text support and m / ∈ S 

then 

20: ∆sem ← tokens for m + required scope 21: if C + ∆ sem ≤ Btok then 

22: Add m and required scope to S; C ←

C + ∆ sem 

23: end if 

24: end if 

25: end for 

26: end for 

27: return S

H.1 Retrieval Configuration Sparse Retrieval. We use standard BM25Okapi settings ( k1=1 .5, b=0 .75 ) over page-level OCR/-body text. Each page is treated as a retrieval unit for the shared base retriever. 

Dense Retrieval. We embed each page with 

Qwen/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B (Zhang et al., 2025) and combine sparse and dense signals via the fixed hybrid score 

0.4 BM25 norm + 0 .6 dense . The current best single-shot setting does not use a dedicated visual retriever in the main comparison; instead, visual information enters through VLM-derived assertions and KG/local reranking priors. A later transfer study further shows that the same-section bonus is negligible and that pool-size sensitivity is agent-family dependent.                 

> Setting Configuration Infrastructure GPU-backed vLLM deployment for the reader; page indices built offline Index Unit Page-level OCR/body text Sparse Retriever BM25Okapi ( k1= 1 .5, b = 0 .75 )Dense Retriever (Text)
> Qwen/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B (Zhang et al., 2025) Dense Retriever (Visual) Not used in the current best system Hybrid Base Score 0.4 BM25 norm + 0 .6 dense
> Shortlist Top-40 pages before reranking Reranking Priors Adjacent-page bonus (+0.04) + KG-derived local/support bonuses; same-section bonus removed as negligible Reader Model Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025) Context Limit 4,500 tokens (approximate page budget) Decoding Greedy decoding (Temperature=0.0) Evaluation Metrics Retrieval: Recall@K, MRR, packing coverage QA: EM, ANLS, ROUGE-L, METEOR

Table 11: Experimental configuration summary for the controlled comparison and the single-shot tuned anal-yses reported in this paper. All matched-interface text-based and graph backends share the same page-level base retriever, reader, and evaluation protocol; only the retrieval backend and reranking priors change. Page-based multimodal methods are reported under the same reader and evaluation protocol but retain their native page-based retrieval pipeline. Appendix D.4 shows that the same backend interface transfers across agents, but the optimal pool size is mildly agent-dependent. 

H.2 Reader Configuration Model & Decoding. We use 

Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct (Bai et al., 2025) as the reader. For consistency and reproducibility, we fix Temperature to 0.0 (greedy decoding) and cap maximum generation at 256 tokens. 

Input Context. The retrieved evidence packet is serialized from reranked full pages : retrieval and reranking operate over pages, but the packet builder attaches selected support metadata (entity bindings, assertion summaries) when available. The total in-put length is limited to approximately 4,500 tokens in the controlled comparison. 

H.3 Prompt Template 

The QA prompt template used in our experiments is illustrated in Fig. 3. We strictly instruct the model to rely solely on the provided [Context] (the assembled evidence packet) to minimize hallucina-tions. QA Prompt Template 

[System Instruction] You are an AI assistant that answers questions by analyz-ing the provided documents. Write an accurate answer to [Question] using only the [Context] given below. - Do not answer using information that is not present in the context. - When referring to tables or figures, explicitly mention their IDs (e.g., Figure 3). - If you cannot be confident, output “I do not have enough information to answer.” [Question] 

<QUESTION_TEXT> 

[Context] 

<ANSWER_SUPPORT_PACKET> 

[Answer] 

Figure 3: Reader prompt template used in the controlled ODQA setup. The [Context] slot is filled with reranked full pages augmented with support metadata when avail-able. We keep this generic prompt in the final sys-tem because stricter “exact short answer” prompts were slightly worse in our controlled sweep. 

I Part I: Statistical Significance Tests 

We report paired approximate randomization tests (Yeh, 2000) (two-sided, 10K permutations) and 95% bootstrap confidence intervals (10K re-samples) for the key comparisons discussed in the main text. 

J Part I: Shared ODQA Evaluation Setup — Bottleneck and Query-Type Analysis 

This appendix reports supplementary paired analy-ses conducted on the M3DocVQA evaluation set discussed in the main text. 

J.1 Heuristic Query-Type Split 

For analysis only, we partition questions into text-grounded and visual-classified subsets using key-word and pattern heuristics (e.g., appearance/col-or/wearing/figure/chart cues for the latter). The split is not used at training time and serves only to interpret where errors come from; a later audit shows that the visual-classified subset is not syn-onymous with “image-only” questions, since most of its answers are still recoverable from OCR text. 

J.2 Oracle and Selection Diagnostics 

We compare the retrieved packet against oracle page substitutions to separate retrieval, ranking,                                                      

> Comparison ∆EM 95% CI pSig.
> Main comparison: PILAR vs Flat chunk (M3DocVQA)
> Naive RAG +1.6 [+0.0, +3.2] 0.048 ∗
> ReAct +0.0 [−1.4, +1.4] 0.781 PlanRAG +0.6 [−0.6, +1.8] 0.500 AutoGen +0.8 [−1.0, +2.6] 0.415
> Pooled +0.8 [+0.0, +1.5] 0.019 ∗
> Main comparison: PILAR vs Flat chunk (Frames)
> Naive RAG +1.2 [−0.2, +2.6] 0.770 ReAct +0.8 [−0.6, +2.2] 1.000 PlanRAG +1.4 [−0.4, +3.2] 1.000 AutoGen +1.1 [−0.7, +3.1] 1.000 Pooled +1.1 [−0.3, +2.5] 0.812
> Strict matched-interface ablation (M3DocVQA, Naive RAG)
> PILAR text-only slice vs Page-only +1.2 [−1.0, +3.4] 0.580 PILAR text-only + local vs Page-only +1.0 [−1.4, +3.2] 0.730 PILAR text-only + local vs PILAR text-only −0.2 [−1.2, +0.8] 1.000
> Final vs Page-only +1.6 [+0.0, +3.2] 0.048 ∗

Table 12: Paired approximate randomization tests (Yeh, 2000) (10K permutations) for key comparisons. ∗: p < 

0.05 . ∆EM values match the comparisons reported in the main tables. On M3DocVQA, the full pipeline significantly outperforms page-only retrieval and flat-chunk baselines; individual ablation components do not individually reach significance, consistent with the component-interaction interpretation. On Frames, no comparison reaches significance, likely due to lower statistical power.                 

> Comparison (M3DocVQA) Win% Tie% Loss% Naive RAG: PILAR vs Flat chunk 2.6 96.6 0.8 Pooled: PILAR vs Flat chunk 2.0 96.9 1.1 Ablation: Final vs Page-only 2.6 96.6 0.8

Table 13: Per-question win/tie/loss rates (EM) for sig-nificant comparisons. The win:loss ratio is consistently favorable ( ≥3:1). 

and reader effects. 

J.3 Matched-Interface Retrieval-Stack Ablation 

We report here the strict matched-interface decom-position that holds the reader, prompt, packet in-terface, and evaluation split fixed while varying locality, the text-instantiated slice of PILAR , vi-sual assertions, and the conservative gate. The same pattern as in the main text reappears: the text-only slice of PILAR supplies the main incremental gain, while visual assertions are slightly harmful in isolation but become modestly useful once locality-aware filtering is present. A key empirical insight is that the current final ordering is answer-centric rather than gold-page-centric. Gold-page MRR decreases slightly after local/graph reranking, but end-to-end EM improves. The local and graph-derived priors therefore act as evidence-ranking signals that surface useful non-gold pages, not merely as mechanisms for promot-Subset Count Retr. EM Gold-page EM Text-grounded 1,757 40.0 48.6 Visual-classified 684 17.1 26.4 Overall 2,441 33.6 42.4 

Table 14: Heuristic query split used in the bottleneck analysis. The visual-classified subset is much harder, but both subsets retain a substantial gold-page oracle gap. Later appendix tables show that this subset is still largely OCR-recoverable. 

Condition EM Interpretation Retrieved final packet 33.6 current system Gold-page text only 42.4 retrieval ceiling Gold + adjacent 41.6 adjacent hurts 

Table 15: Oracle comparison (M3DocVQA). The gold-page oracle establishes a +8.8 pp headroom, while adding adjacent pages is not helpful once the correct page is already available. 

ing the gold page itself. The strict ablation makes the interaction more precise: the text-instantiated slice of PILAR is the main incremental compo-nent, while visual assertions are beneficial only once locality-aware filtering is present. 

J.4 Reader-Family Comparison 

We additionally compare the default 8B instruction-tuned VLM reader against a larger 14B text-only model under the same gold-page oracle protocol (raw gold-page text concatenation, same token bud-get, same evaluation). Table 18 shows that parame-ter count alone does not yield a stronger reader for this task: the 14B text-only model is worse on re-trieved context and fails to exceed the 8B VLM un-der the gold-page oracle. In other words, a stronger reader for this task is not simply a bigger text-only model; model family and instruction tuning matter more than raw parameter count. 

J.5 Query-Type and Modality Oracle Analysis 

Table 19 stratifies PILAR performance by query phenotype: text-grounded questions (whose answer is typically recoverable from OCR text) versus 

visual-classified questions (flagged by visual/ap-pearance/layout cues in the query). Classification is performed with a keyword/pattern heuristic; im-portantly, a later audit shows that most of the visual-classified subset is still answerable from OCR text. Adding gold-page images to gold-page text does not improve—and slightly hurts—visual-classified EM (26.4 → 25.7), suggesting that at the current 

Stage %R0: gold page absent from index 7.2 R1: in index, not in base top-40 16.2 R2: in top-40, dropped by reranking 12.6 R3: in ranking, dropped by packing 0.0 R4: packed evidence contains gold 64.0 

Table 16: Stage-wise loss analysis for the current best configuration. Packing is not the bottleneck (R3=0), while base recall and reranking remain the main failure points.                                                         

> Variant Local Text slice Visual Gate EM ANLS ROUGE-L Page-only retrieval ––––32.0 34.4 37.3 Page-only + local prior Yes –––32.4 35.6 38.6 PILAR (text-only slice) –Yes ––33.2 36.1 38.9 PILAR (text-only) + local Yes Yes ––33.0 36.1 39.0 PILAR (text+visual slice) –Yes Yes –32.8 35.6 38.2 PILAR (text+visual) + local Yes Yes Yes –33.4 36.1 38.9 Final (+ gate) Yes Yes Yes Yes 33.6 36.3 39.1

Table 17: Strict matched-interface ablation (Naive RAG, M3DocVQA). All rows share the same reader, prompt, packet budget, and evaluation split. The table separates page-only retrieval, page-boundary locality, the text-only slice of PILAR , visual assertions, and the conser-vative expansion gate under a single matched interface. The key comparison is between PILAR (text-only) + local and PILAR (text+visual) + local , which isolates the incremental contribution of visual assertions under fixed locality priors and packetization. The text-only slice of PILAR provides the largest single gain (+1.2 EM over page-only), while visual assertions are slightly harmful in isolation but recover a +0.4 EM increment once locality-aware filtering is applied. 

8B scale the reader treats raw page images as noise rather than as complementary evidence. 

J.6 Visual Answer-Source Audit and Modality Oracle 

To understand the hard visual-classified subset, we audit whether the answer is actually absent from OCR text or whether the reader simply fails to ex-tract it. Table 20 shows that approximately 74% of visual-classified questions still have the answer in OCR text, while about 48% are reader failures de-spite answer presence. This means that the visual-classified subset is hard, but not primarily because it requires image-only reasoning; under our audit criteria, the vast majority of these cases have an OCR-recoverable answer. We further compare text-only and image-based gold-page oracles on this subset. Table 21 shows that text-only gold pages outperform image-only gold pages, and that adding images to text does not improve over text alone. Under the current 8B Reader Context All EM Text EM Vis. EM Qwen3-VL-8B Retrieved final packet 33.6 40.0 17.1 Qwen3-14B Retrieved final packet 31.6 38.6 13.6 Qwen3-VL-8B Gold-page text only 42.4 48.6 26.4 Qwen3-14B Gold-page text only 42.0 47.8 27.1 

Table 18: Reader-family comparison under a gold-page oracle protocol. A 14B text-only model does not outper-form the 8B instruction-tuned VLM, either on retrieved packets or under the gold-page oracle.                                    

> EM ANLS Condition Text Visual Text Visual (n=1,757) (n=684) (n=1,757) (n=684)
> PILAR (retrieved) 40.0 17.1 43.4 18.1
> PILAR (gold text) 48.6 26.4 51.7 26.9
> PILAR (gold image) —18.6 —19.1
> PILAR (gold image+text) —25.7 —26.7
> ∆(gold text −retrieved) +8.6 +9.3 +8.3 +8.8

Table 19: Query-type and modality oracle analysis 

(Naive RAG, M3DocVQA). Text-grounded vs. visual-classified query performance under retrieved context, gold-page text, gold-page image, and gold-page im-age+text. The retrieval gap ( ∆) is similar for both sub-sets, but the visual-classified subset starts much lower. 

VLM, the reader relies much more on OCR text than on raw page images. 

J.7 Query-Attribute Analysis 

We reanalyze the M3DocVQA evaluation set by hop count, coarse question family, modality, and number of supporting documents to localize where the PILAR retrieval stack helps most. The con-densed summary now appears in main-text Table 3. In short, the gains concentrate on compositional, comparison, two-document, and multi-modal sub-sets. The sampled 3-hop bucket shows the largest observed improvement, but because it is relatively small we treat it as suggestive rather than definitive. 

J.8 Frames as a Support-Chain Stress Test 

We use Frames as a harder ODQA stress test for long support-chain recovery. In our hop-count anal-ysis of the full Frames evaluation split, 770/824 questions (93.5%) lie in the 2+hop regime, so we focus the detailed analysis on 2-hop, 3-hop, and 4+hop buckets rather than treating Frames as a precision-dominated single-hop benchmark. The shared cross-agent comparison in Table 2 reports full-Frames results under the common retrieval configuration used elsewhere in the paper. Sep-arately, a benchmark-matched full-set recomputa-tion shows that the M3DocVQA-tuned single-shot 

Category %Answer in OCR, reader correct 26.4 Answer in OCR, reader failed 47.9 No gold page in index 25.7 Answer absent from OCR 0.0 

Table 20: Answer-source audit on the visual-classified subset. Most are still OCR-recoverable; the largest error source is reader failure despite answer presence in OCR. 

Input modality EM ANLS ROUGE-L Retrieved final context 17.1 18.1 20.4 Gold page text only 26.4 26.9 29.1 Gold page image only 18.6 19.1 21.1 Gold page image + text 25.7 26.7 29.6 

Table 21: Visual-classified subset modality oracle. Raw page images do not outperform OCR text, and im-age+text is not better than text alone at 8B scale. 

setting is not appropriate for Frames: the adjacent-page bonus acts as noise, while a modestly broader pool is mildly helpful. Under the Frames-matched setting (no adjacent bonus, multiplier 4), PILAR 

becomes the strongest directly comparable back-end on the full Frames split, although the margins remain modest. We treat this Frames-matched re-sult as a robustness analysis on Frames rather than as a held-out hyperparameter-selection outcome. 

Backend EM ANLS ROUGE-L 

PILAR (Frames-matched) 14.2 17.8 21.3 

Flat chunk 13.4 17.1 20.2 

PILAR w/o entity exp. 13.2 16.8 20.1 MS GraphRAG 13.0 16.6 19.7 LightRAG 12.4 15.7 18.6 MultiDocFusion 12.4 15.8 18.4 

Table 22: Full-set Frames comparison under the Frames-matched setting ( initial_multiplier =4, 

adjacent_page_bonus =0). PILAR is the strongest directly comparable backend overall, but the margin over flat retrieval remains modest (+0.8 EM, +0.7 ANLS). 

To understand why the gain remains small, we compare retrieval tuning and oracle variants on the 2+hop subset. Removing the local prior alone improves PILAR by +1.7 EM and +2.0 ANLS over the original Frames baseline, while widening the pool from multiplier 2 to 4 adds only a further +0.4 EM. This shows that the main fix is not broader exploration by itself, but removing a locality prior that is mismatched to support-chain retrieval. Coverage diagnostics explain why the end-to-Condition 2+hop EM 2+hop ANLS F0: original baseline 9.7 13.2 F1: no adj. bonus 11.4 15.2 Frames-matched 11.8 15.4 O1: gold answer page only 3.4 4.7 O2: all gold support pages 17.7 21.7 

Table 23: Frames 2+hop stress-test summary. The an-swer page alone is insufficient; the gold support-chain oracle is far stronger than the gold answer-page oracle, which shows that support-chain completeness matters more than answer-page recovery alone. Yet even the support-chain oracle remains low, indicating a substan-tial reader/reasoning bottleneck. 

end margin remains modest. Under the current objective, PILAR achieves only slightly higher support-chain coverage than flat retrieval (e.g., all-support-docs@10 of 53.2% vs. 52.1%), while retrieving more diverse but also more dispersed evidence. We therefore interpret Frames as ev-idence that the current PILAR objective is bet-ter aligned with evidence aggregation than with strict support-chain reconstruction. This does not negate the M3DocVQA result; rather, it shows that benchmark-specific retrieval objectives matter, and that locality-aware priors can switch from helpful to harmful depending on whether the benchmark emphasizes page continuity or support-chain com-pleteness. K Part II: PILAR-Specific Analysis — Retrieval Trace and Comparison 

K.1 Query-Driven Retrieval Trace 

Figure 4 illustrates how PILAR processes a single query through the seed → expand → pack pipeline. Starting from the base page shortlist, the system matches query terms against entity and assertion fields to find seed nodes. The query classifier se-lects an expansion profile, and graph traversal fol-lows entity–assertion–support edges to collect a neighborhood. The packet builder then assembles the final packet under the token budget.               

> Query: “What is the max RPM of Engine-X?”
> 1. Base Shortlist
> BM25+dense →top-40 pages
> 2. Seed Match
> query →entity/assertion fields
> Engine-X
> seed entity
> max_rpm = 5000
> seed assertion
> 3. Classify (E) →Graph Expand
> follow entity →assertion →support edges
> exception: 4500 if cond_C
> Table 3, row 2 primary §2.1 para 3 contextual Fig 5 crop visual
> 4. Evidence Packet (within token budget Btok )
> page context + support metadata + visual crops
> Reader (Qwen3-VL-8B)

Figure 4: Query-driven retrieval trace in PILAR . A query enters the base shortlist, seeds are matched against entity/assertion fields, the query classifier selects an expansion profile, and graph traversal collects a support neighborhood. The packet builder assembles the final token-budgeted packet for the reader. 

K.2 Flat Retrieval vs. PILAR 

Figure 5 contrasts flat chunk retrieval with PILAR 

on the same cross-document query. Flat retrieval returns the highest-scoring page from one docu-ment but misses the cross-document qualifier and visual evidence. PILAR uses the entity bridge to traverse to the second document and includes both the text-derived exception and the VLM-derived visual assertion in the final packet. Flat Chunk Retrieval 

Query: “Max RPM of Engine-X and any exceptions?” Chunk: “Engine-X max RPM = 5000” 

> Doc 1, §2.1

Chunk: “Engine-X specs overview” 

> Doc 1, §2.0 MISSED

Exception: 4500 rpm if condition_C 

> Doc 2, Fig 5 caption MISSED

Wear pattern chart  

> Doc 2, Fig 5 crop no bridge no bridge

Flat Packet 

> Doc 1 chunks only missing exception + visual

PILAR Retrieval 

Query: “Max RPM of Engine-X and any exceptions?” 

Engine-X 

> Doc 1

Engine-X 

> Doc 2
> same_as

max_rpm = 5000 

> text-derived Table 3, row 2 primary support

exception: 4500 

> if condition_C

wear = abnormal 

> VLM assertion Fig 5 caption text support Fig 5 crop visual support

Evidence Packet  

> Doc 1: spec table + text Doc 2: exception + visual crop cross-document evidence assembled via entity bridge

Figure 5: Flat retrieval vs. PILAR on the same cross-document query. Left: Flat chunk retrieval returns top-scoring chunks from Doc 1 but misses the cross-document exception and visual evidence in Doc 2 because no entity bridge exists. Right: PILAR links Engine-X across documents via a same_as edge, retrieves both text-derived and VLM-derived assertions, and assembles a complete packet that includes the exception qualifier and the visual wear-pattern evidence. L Part II: PILAR-Specific Analysis — Runtime and Scalability Analysis 

We analyze the computational cost of PILAR un-der a realistic industrial setting. Measurements are conducted on a single NVIDIA H100 (80GB) GPU with 144 DPI rendering and high-precision OCR settings. 

L.1 Offline Indexing Cost 

Table 24 breaks down the processing runtime by document length. 

Findings and Cost Justification. Visual analysis (layout, OCR, embeddings) remains the dominant component of the offline cost under the setup re-ported in Table 24. The additional cost of assertion induction is concentrated in the VLM path for vi-sual elements, while the text-only LLM path and post-processing (verification, predicate normaliza-tion) are comparatively small. Section-level batch-ing keeps model invocations practical, and the as-sertion induction stages scale roughly linearly with document size in the measured regime.                                                

> Stage Latency (s) Complexity 5 pages 10 pages 20 pages
> Visual Analysis (High-Res)
> Layout Detection 5.2 10.5 21.2 O(P)
> OCR (Dense Text) 24.5 48.2 98.4 O(P×T)
> Visual Embedding 12.5 25.8 52.6 O(Nimg )
> Structure & Graph Construction
> Structure Parse 0.5 1.0 2.1 O(Nblk )
> Graph Build 0.2 0.4 0.9 O(N+E)
> Assertion Induction
> Text-only LLM (batch) 1–4 3–8 6–16 O(Ntext )
> VLM visual extraction (batch) 3–8 6–16 12–32 O(Nvisual )
> Self-verif. + span alignment 0.2 0.4 0.8 O(Ninduced )
> Predicate normalization 0.1 0.1 0.2 O(Npred )
> Total Indexing Time 46.6–51.6 93.2–103.2 189.8–209.8 Linear w.r.t Pages

Table 24: Offline indexing runtime and scalability. The Assertion Induction block reports the cost of the modality-based extraction pipeline. VLM latency is shown as a range because the number of visual elements varies by document. Across the measured setup, visual analysis remains the dominant cost, while the assertion induction stages add bounded offline overhead.