Title: Ovis-Embedding: Pushing the Frontiers of Universal Omni-Modal Embeddings

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.25165v1

Published Time: Wed, 23 Sep 2026 00:07:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
September 23, 2026 

# Ovis-Embedding: Pushing the Frontiers of Universal Omni-Modal Embeddings 

Ovis-Embedding Team 

Alibaba Token Hub, Alibaba Group 

https://github.com/ATH-MaaS/Ovis-Omni-Embedding 

https://github.com/ATH-MaaS/Ovis-VL-Embedding 

## Abstract 

In this report, we introduce Ovis-Embedding , a state-of-the-art omni-modal embedding family built on native integration of text, image, video, and audio. Instead of assem-bling separate modality towers, Ovis-Embedding uses a shared multimodal backbone to encode different modalities in a common representation space. Specifically, we make 

three key advances : (1) native omni-modal initialization : we adopt a pretrained Qwen-omni model as the embedding backbone and adapt it through contrastive training with low-rank initialization; (2) data-centric omni-modal training : we construct a broad, high-quality corpus spanning text, images, video, audio, and interleaved multimodal data. To improve data efficiency, we introduce homogeneous-source sampling to form task-consistent batches with informative in-batch negatives; and (3) embedding-specific training and inference optimization : we use focal loss to emphasize hard examples and similarity-based Embedding Distillation to transfer fine-grained similarity structure from complementary experts. At inference time, low-rank feature decomposition en-ables compact embeddings with flexible dimensionality and minimal performance loss. Empirical evaluations show that the Ovis-Embedding family achieves state-of-the-art performance on MMEB-v3 , MMEB-v2 , MVEB , MAEB , and RTEB , demonstrating its effectiveness across text, image, video, and audio modalities. These results highlight the potential of unified omni-modal training to overcome modality fragmentation and advance universal embedding models for any-to-any retrieval. MMEB-v3: Omni-modal Retrieval 

> 77.5
> 43.4 70.5 56.3 75.0
> 65.0
> 41.4 50.8 53.0 61.9
> 78.3
> 72.3 75.4 69.2
> 47.1
> 39.2 26.9 32.4 39.2
> 50.1
> 36.5 43.0 43.2
> 45.5
> 36.5 36.7 27.8
> IMG VID VISDOC TXT AUD AGENT
> Omni-3B
> MMEB-v2: Vision–Language Retrieval
> 84.0
> 78.0 80.1 79.8 81.9
> 80.1
> 75.0 74.2 74.5 75.7 86.7
> 74.9 81.1 80.9 84.5
> 64.9
> 54.8 56.1 58.5 60.4
> 83.1
> 82.4 82.4 82.0 80.5
> IMG IMG-CLS IMG-QA V-MRET VISDOC
> VL-9B
> Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B omni-embed-nemotron-3b e5-omni-7B LCO-Embedding-Omni-7B Qwen3-VL-Embedding-2B Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B seed1.6-embedding-1215 Qwen3-VL-Embedding-8B DME-Medium Octen-VL-Embedding-Large

Figure 1: Ovis-Embedding performance across modalities. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B leads all six MMEB-v3 modality groups (left), while Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B leads four of five MMEB-v2 task groups (right). Bar lengths are normalized within each benchmark; labels show the original percentage scores. 1arXiv:2609.25165v1 [cs.AI] 21 Sep 2026 1 Introduction 

Dense embeddings serve as a core retrieval layer for search, retrieval-augmented generation, recom-mendation, and agentic systems (Zhang et al., 2025; Lewis et al., 2020; Covington et al., 2016; Park et al., 2023). As modern information repositories increasingly combine text, images, videos, audio, visual documents, and interface states, retrieval can no longer be reduced to a small number of predefined modality pairs. Consider a maintenance agent investigating an abnormal machine sound: it may use an audio clip together with a short textual description to retrieve a relevant video tutorial, a diagram in a PDF manual, or a previous service record. Solving such a task requires a query—potentially composed of multiple modalities—to be matched directly against candidates in different modalities within the same index (Zhang et al., 2024a; Xu et al., 2025b). Merely representing heterogeneous inputs as vectors of equal size is insufficient. Their representations must instead form a coherent, calibrated semantic space in which relevance scores are comparable across modalities while the fine-grained distinctions needed within each modality are retained (Huang et al., 2026). We refer to this general retrieval setting as 

any-to-any retrieval .Existing multimodal embedders provide an incomplete foundation for universal retrieval. Vision– language specialists (Li et al., 2026a; Jiang et al., 2025) do not support audio, while existing omni-modal systems (Wang et al., 2025; Xiao et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025; Günther et al., 2025) typically add an audio pathway to a pretrained text–vision embedder or align a separate audio encoder with an established embedding space. In both cases, acoustic inputs are adapted to a geometry learned without them, which may limit fine-grained alignment across modalities. We introduce Ovis-Embedding , built directly on the pretrained Qwen-Omni understanding model (Xu et al., 2025a), whose text, vision, audio, and video inputs are processed by a shared model. We remove the speech-generation pathway and use the final-layer state at the last non-padding token as the embedding, without adding modality-specific projection heads. This converts the native understanding backbone into a unified encoder for any-to-any retrieval with either unimodal or interleaved inputs. To train this representation, we build a large-scale corpus spanning text, images, video, audio, and interleaved inputs. Text data cover retrieval and semantic matching. Image data support classification, question answering, retrieval, and grounding, while video data consist of query–video pairs verified by a VLM. Audio data cover recognition and bidirectional audio–text retrieval. Interleaved samples combine multiple modalities, and agent data target tool, GUI, and knowledge retrieval. We cast samples as query–positive–negative tuples, discard invalid or duplicated items, filter false negatives, and balance query and candidate modalities. All multimodal data are then fed into our omni-embedding model. We develop a coordinated optimization-and-deployment recipe that progressively establishes broad omni-modal alignment. We begin with low-rank contrastive pretraining on the large-scale omni-modal corpus, gathering candidates across data-parallel workers to form a broad cross-modal negative pool. A difficulty-aware focal objective concentrates learning on unresolved queries, while precomputed similarity distributions from modality experts provide graded ranking supervision over both positive and negative candidates. We then unfreeze the full model and refine it on higher-quality data using the homogeneous-source batches described above, sharpening discrimination among task-consistent candidates. As optimization approaches saturation, Embedding Distillation retains teacher-correct examples, upsamples cases still missed by the student, and assigns stronger ranking supervision to less confident queries, transferring expert capabilities without introducing modality-specific components at inference. Finally, a low-rank feature transformation with lightweight residual adaptation produces multiple compact embedding dimensions from the same encoder, reducing index storage and similarity-computation costs with minimal loss in retrieval quality. Together, the native initialization, comprehensive data pipeline, and embedding-specific training and inference optimizations produce state-of-the-art results across both general and modality-intensive evalu-ation: Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B establishes a new state-of-the-art on MMEB-v3 , Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B ranks top on MMEB-v2 , and the Ovis-Embedding family further advances MVEB , MAEB , and RTEB .To make these advances broadly accessible, we will open-source the model checkpoints, training and data-construction recipes, inference code, and unified evaluation toolkit. We hope this will provide the community with a foundation for developing and evaluating universal embedding models, particularly for the audio, audio–video, and any-to-any retrieval settings that remain under-served by existing open resources. 

Contributions. Our work makes the following contributions. • Native omni-modal initialization for universal embeddings. Unlike existing approaches that retrofit an audio branch onto a vision–language embedder or align a separately trained audio embedding model, we start directly from a pretrained omni-modal understanding model. By 2(a) Ovis -Embedding -Omni -3B 

> Image
> embedding
> Video
> embedding
> Audio
> embedding
> Text
> embedding

Retrieval embedding e(x) 

> Final -layer hidden states

Qwen2.5 -Omni Thinker  

> Shared causal Transformer
> Interleaved token sequence TMRoPE

(b) Ovis -Embedding -VL -2B / 9B 

> Image
> embedding
> Video
> embedding
> Text
> embedding
> Final -layer hidden states

Qwen3.5 language backbone                

> 3×Gated DeltaNet + 1 ×gated full attention (repeated)
> Interleaved token sequence multimodal positional encoding
> Text tokenizer
> + embedding table Vision encoder Audio encoder
> Text
> Represent this
> input for retrieval:
> A cyclist riding
> through a field.
> Images / documents / video
> Image Document Video frames
> Single or interleaved visual inputs
> Audio
> Speech / music
> Environmental
> sound
> Text tokenizer
> + embedding table
> Vision encoder
> Dynamic -resolution images / sampled video frames
> Text
> Represent this
> input for retrieval:
> A cyclist riding
> through a field.
> Images / documents / video
> Image Document Video frames
> Single or interleaved visual inputs
> Text ·image ·video ·audio ·interleaved combinations Text ·image ·video ·interleaved combinations
> Text token Visual token Audio token Hidden state

Retrieval embedding e(x) Figure 2: Architecture of Ovis-Embedding. (a) Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B encodes text, visual, and audio inputs as an interleaved token sequence processed by the Qwen2.5-Omni Thinker with TMRoPE. (b) Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B/9B processes text and visual inputs with the Qwen3.5 language backbone. Both variants use the final-layer hidden state at the last non-padding token as the retrieval embedding, supporting both unimodal and interleaved inputs without modality-specific projection heads. retaining Qwen-Omni’s natively aligned text, vision, audio, and video front-ends and their shared encoder, Ovis-Embedding learns any-to-any retrieval in a coherent representation space without modality-specific embedding heads. • Omni-modal homogeneous-source sampling. We introduce a unified sampling strategy across text, image, video, audio, visual-document, agent, and interleaved multimodal tasks. Drawing each micro-batch from one source and deduplicating pooled candidates produces task-consistent hard negatives, reducing modality shortcuts and improving fine-grained discrimination in the shared embedding space. • Embedding-specific training and inference optimization. During training, difficulty-aware focal loss bootstraps a robust universal embedding space by emphasizing unresolved hard examples, while similarity-based Embedding Distillation transfers the fine-grained similarity geometry of complementary experts into a single encoder. At inference time, low-rank feature decomposition supports compact embeddings with flexible dimensionality, reducing retrieval storage and computation with minimal performance loss. • Open state-of-the-art models for the community. We will release a family of state-of-the-art checkpoints covering both vision–language and native omni-modal retrieval, together with training and inference code and a unified evaluation toolkit. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B estab-lishes a new state of the art on MMEB-v3, Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B leads MMEB-v2, and the family further advances the state of the art on MVEB, MAEB, and RTEB, providing an accessible foundation for universal embedding research. 

## 2 Model Architecture 

Backbone family. Ovis-Embedding is instantiated from two complementary native multimodal back-bones. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B is initialized from Qwen2.5-Omni-3B (Xu et al., 2025a) and supports text, images, video, and audio. Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B and Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B are initialized from Qwen3.5-2B and Qwen3.5-9B, respectively, and support text, images, and video. Thus, all three models start from backbones that were trained to fuse multiple modalities natively; the distinction is that the Omni variant additionally provides a native audio pathway, whereas the VL variants devote 3their capacity to vision–language representation learning. This design gives the model family a common retrieval interface while covering different modality, accuracy, and efficiency requirements. The overall architecture is shown in Fig. 2. 

Embedding adaptation. We convert each generative backbone into a bi-encoder using the same minimal adaptation. An input x, which may contain one modality or an interleaved combination of supported modalities, is formatted with a task instruction by the backbone’s native processor and chat template. The resulting text and modality tokens are processed jointly by the pretrained backbone. We remove the language-modeling output head and use the final-layer hidden state at the last non-padding token as the sequence representation, 

e(x) = h(L) 

> ℓ(x)

∈ Rd, (1) where L is the number of backbone layers, ℓ(x) denotes the last valid token position, and d is the native hidden size of the selected backbone. We do not introduce an additional embedding projection or modality-specific output head. Consequently, the embedding dimensionality is inherited directly from the backbone, and all supported input types are mapped through the same output interface. Training and retrieval use cosine similarity (equivalently, a dot product between ℓ2-normalized embeddings), as defined in Section 4.1. This parameter-free conversion preserves the cross-modal alignment learned during multimodal pretraining while specializing the representation space for retrieval. 

2.1 Omni Architecture 

The Omni model uses the Thinker–Talker architecture of Qwen2.5-Omni-3B (Xu et al., 2025a). In the original model, a vision encoder maps images and video frames to visual tokens, an audio encoder maps speech, music, and environmental sounds to acoustic tokens, and a tokenizer provides text tokens. These streams are interleaved and consumed by the shared causal Transformer, termed the Thinker . Time-aligned Multimodal Rotary Position Embedding (TMRoPE) aligns the temporal positions of audio and video, allowing the Thinker to model synchronized audio–visual content in addition to single-modality inputs. The separate Talker predicts streaming speech units from Thinker representations in the original generative system. For Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B, speech generation is unnecessary. We therefore discard the Talker and retain the text tokenizer, vision encoder, audio encoder, and Thinker. The pooled Thinker state is used directly as the embedding. Unlike approaches that attach independently trained modality towers to a text model, this construction reuses a backbone in which text, image, video, and audio were already aligned through a shared Transformer. Consequently, each side of a retrieval pair—both the query and the candidate—may contain any combination of text, images, video, and audio, including interleaved and synchronized inputs. Conventional unimodal or pairwise retrieval, such as text–text, image–text, video–text, audio–text, and audio–video retrieval, therefore becomes a special case of general any-to-any retrieval within one representation space. 

2.2 Vision–Language Architecture 

The VL models use the dense Qwen3.5-2B and Qwen3.5-9B backbones (Qwen Team, 2026). Qwen3.5 is natively trained on interleaved text, image, and video tokens rather than extending a text-only model with a post-hoc retrieval tower. Its vision encoder converts dynamic-resolution images and temporally sampled video frames into compact visual-token sequences, which are inserted into the language-token stream and processed jointly by the causal backbone. Multimodal rotary position encoding preserves temporal and two-dimensional spatial coordinates for these visual tokens. The Qwen3.5 language backbone uses a hybrid stack with three Gated DeltaNet linear-attention layers for every full gated-attention layer. This design uses linear attention for efficient long-context processing while periodically applying full attention for precise global token interaction. Qwen3.5-2B uses 24 backbone layers with hidden size 2,048, whereas Qwen3.5-9B uses 32 layers with hidden size 4,096. We remove the language-modeling output head from both models and apply the shared last-token pooling rule described above, without adding a projection head. The 2B variant provides a compact vision–language embedder, while the 9B variant provides higher capacity; both retain a common training objective and inference interface for text, image, video, and their interleaved combinations. 

## 3 Training Data 

We construct a large-scale training corpus spanning text, images and visual documents, video, audio, and interleaved multimodal inputs from both public and proprietary sources. Figure 3 summarizes 4Images & documents   

> Reuse labels & synthesize QA
> VLM -label web images
> Match search / region pairs
> Video
> Search, sample & VLM -verify
> Form positives / negatives
> Refine q with fixed videos
> Audio
> Reuse audio -text supervision
> Build bidirectional pairs
> Sample same -task negatives
> Text
> Reuse pairs & recast evidence
> Build one -condition negatives
> Mine hard negatives by task
> Agent tasks
> Recover annotated positives
> Keep GUI / evidence context
> Use BM25 / random negatives
> Speech Music Sound

Figure 3: Modality-specific data construction. Training pairs for images and documents, video, audio, text, and agent tasks are constructed with task-specific supervision, semantic verification, pair formation, and negative mining. These pipelines produce quality-controlled examples for unified omni-modal embedding training. the modality-specific construction pipelines. For images and documents, we reuse annotated datasets, synthesize question–answer pairs, label web images with a VLM, and form search and region-level pairs. For video, we retrieve web clips, verify their sampled frames with a VLM, construct positive and negative pairs, and refine queries while keeping the selected videos fixed. For audio, we reuse audio–text supervision to build bidirectional pairs with same-task negatives. For text, we recast existing pairs and evidence as retrieval examples and construct task-specific hard negatives, including negatives that violate a single query condition. For agent tasks, we recover annotated positives, preserve GUI and evidence context, and use BM25-based or random negatives. All examples are standardized as query–positive–negative tuples and undergo deduplication and multi-stage quality filtering. All data associated with evaluation test sets are strictly deduplicated against the training corpus. For this audit, we use normalized text matching for textual data and perceptual-hash matching for visual data, removing all detected overlaps. The resulting corpus contains approximately 

50M (query, target) training pairs. 1

3.1 Image Data 

We organize the image training corpus around four complementary task families: image classification, image question answering, image retrieval, and image grounding (GD). The data format can be found in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 

Image classification. We draw the core supervision from classical computer-vision datasets, including ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), CUB-200 (Wah et al., 2011), and SUN397 (Xiao et al., 2010), which collectively cover generic objects, fine-grained bird species, and diverse scene categories. To extend this supervision beyond the closed taxonomies and visual distributions of established benchmarks, we further collect candidate images returned by web search and use Qwen3.5-Plus to inspect their visual content and assign category labels. The resulting web-augmented classification data substantially broaden both category coverage and intra-class appearance variation. 

Image question answering. We construct and synthesize training examples from established sources such as TextVQA (Singh et al., 2019), DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2021), and InfoVQA (Mathew et al., 2022), covering scene text, document understanding, and information-rich visual content. We complement these conventional tasks with synthetically generated QA data for long-tail scenarios that are sparsely represented in public datasets, thereby improving coverage of uncommon entities, specialized contexts, and less frequent visual reasoning patterns. 

Image retrieval. The data are collected from three principal sources: news image–text pairs, text-to-image search data, and image-to-image search data. News data provide semantically rich correspondence between visual events and their textual context, text-to-image search captures open-domain user intent expressed in natural language, and image-to-image search supplies direct supervision for instance-level and semantic visual matching. 

Image grounding. We construct region-aware supervision from MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and its subsequent derivative datasets, converting their object, region, and language annotations into fine-grained grounding examples. 

Open-world image retrieval. Beyond these four standard task families, we also collect concrete queries issued by online users and use Quark web search to retrieve relevant content and synthesize a broader product-oriented dataset. This additional data introduces realistic, colloquial, and highly diverse shop-

> 1

All numbers reported in this subsection are placeholder estimates based on the current data freeze; the final figures will be updated for the camera-ready version. 

5ping intents, extending the image corpus from benchmark-defined tasks to practical open-world retrieval. Together, these sources provide supervision at category, question-answering, global retrieval, and local grounding levels, enabling the model to learn both broad visual semantics and fine-grained cross-modal relevance. 

3.2 Video Data 

We adopt a general collect–filter–organize pipeline to construct video data for a broad range of multimodal embedding tasks. Task-relevant textual descriptions are used to retrieve an initial pool of web videos with broad visual coverage. The collected candidates are subsequently filtered and organized through content-based validation tailored to each downstream task. The downloader paginates through search results, applies basic duration and format constraints, prefers suitable video encodings, retries failed downloads, and records provenance and technical metadata. The resulting candidates are treated as noisy, unlabeled videos until their visual content has been independently validated. 

Semantic validation. The validation procedure is adapted to the target task. Uniformly sampled frames from each candidate are provided to a vision–language model together with a task-specific instruction. The model determines whether the observable content satisfies the intended semantic condition and returns a structured judgment. Only candidates passing this content-based verification are converted into training examples. This shared framework can support classification, retrieval, and other video understanding objectives by changing the discovery prompts, validation criteria, and final positive– negative organization. 

Video classification. Candidate discovery is organized around a broad vocabulary of actions and events relevant to the desired semantic coverage. Importantly, these concepts act only as retrieval cues during acquisition. For every candidate clip, a vision–language model independently verifies whether the sampled visual content actually depicts the corresponding action or event. The discovery concept is converted into a positive training label only after this verification succeeds; unrelated or ambiguous search results are discarded. Each accepted video is then paired with its verified category text, while category descriptions sampled from the remaining task vocabulary serve as negative texts. Thus, the final classification supervision is determined by video-content validation rather than by the ranking or metadata returned by the search engine. 

Video retrieval. Natural-language descriptions are used to retrieve an initial pool of candidate videos. The subsequent processing follows a filter-then-refine procedure. First, a vision–language model evaluates each downloaded video against its original query and assigns an ordinal relevance score based on uniformly sampled frames. Only query–video pairs receiving the highest relevance level are retained. These filtered pairs are then organized into contrastive samples: the retained video serves as the positive candidate, while negative videos are randomly sampled from other retained pairs associated with different normalized query strings. After the positive and negative candidate sets have been fixed, a second vision–language model pass performs conservative, video-grounded query refinement. The model receives the original query together with frames sampled from the verified positive video and determines whether the text accurately describes the visible content. If the query is already accurate, it is preserved unchanged. Otherwise, the model corrects only observable factual mismatches, such as the number of people, the depicted action, or the involved objects. The revised query is required to remain concise, preserve the correct portions and expression style of the original text, and avoid introducing details that cannot be clearly observed. The refinement result is matched back to the sample through the positive-video identity, and only the query text is updated; the previously selected positive and negative videos remain unchanged. This ensures that query rewriting is applied only to video–text pairs that have already passed the relevance filter, rather than directly modifying the raw search queries or unverified candidates. Following the filter-then-refine procedure, the finalized query is matched back to its corresponding sample through the positive-video identity. Only the textual supervision is updated, while the positive and negative candidate sets established during the filtering stage remain unchanged. The referenced videos are subsequently converted into a consistent input representation, and incomplete samples are removed through basic integrity checks. Overall, this pipeline transforms broadly retrieved video candidates into content-grounded multimodal examples through task-specific validation and conservative semantic correction. The classification and retrieval cases illustrate how the same general construction framework can be adapted to different learning objectives: classification data emphasize verified video–category alignment, whereas retrieval data preserve fine-grained video–text correspondence through relevance filtering and query refinement. The framework can be extended to additional video tasks by modifying the semantic validation criteria and the organization of positive and negative supervision. 63.3 Audio Data 

We construct the audio training corpus to cover three complementary forms of acoustic understanding. First, recognition-oriented data associate audio clips with semantic categories spanning environmental events, urban sounds, musical instruments, and spoken commands. Second, audio–language matching data pair non-speech sounds with natural-language descriptions and speech segments with their tran-scripts. Third, bidirectional retrieval data train both audio-to-text and text-to-audio matching, allowing either modality to serve as the query. Together, these sources expose the model to speech, music, and diverse everyday sound events rather than allowing the audio representation to be dominated by a single acoustic domain. 

Audio recognition. The recognition data provide supervision at several levels of semantic granularity. Broad sound-event and acoustic-scene labels teach the encoder to identify the dominant source and context of a recording, while instrument and spoken-word labels emphasize timbre, phonetic content, and short-duration cues. 

Audio–language matching. The descriptive data complement these relatively compact label spaces with free-form captions that may refer to multiple co-occurring events, their temporal evolution, and the surrounding acoustic environment. Speech segments paired with transcripts further connect linguistic content expressed in audio to its textual realization. Combining these forms of supervision encourages the model to preserve both non-linguistic acoustic semantics and spoken-language information in the same representation. 

Unified contrastive format. We convert every source into a shared contrastive-retrieval format consisting of a query, a matched target, and task-consistent negative candidates. For recognition tasks, an audio query retrieves its corresponding textual category. For caption and transcription tasks, the target is a natural-language description or transcript with substantially richer semantics. 

Bidirectional retrieval. Where paired audio–text data are available, we construct both retrieval directions: audio queries retrieve text, and textual queries retrieve audio. This symmetric construction reduces directional bias and makes the learned space directly usable for cross-modal search regardless of which modality initiates retrieval. 

Negative construction and filtering. Negative candidates are kept within the same task family whenever possible, so that the model must distinguish semantically related sounds or descriptions rather than relying on coarse differences in input format. Before training, we apply basic format and content validation, remove invalid or duplicate entries, and balance heterogeneous sources to limit domination by the largest speech or caption collections. The resulting corpus can be mixed with text, image, and video supervision under the same embedding objective, requiring neither an audio-specific loss nor a separate audio output space. 

3.4 Text Data 

Following the fine-grained text retrieval categories proposed by Jiang et al. (2024), we construct text datasets across five primary task paradigms. What separates these paradigms is not their subject matter but the extra relevance criterion they impose and consequently the locus at which a training signal has to be manufactured. 

General text retrieval. The query q expresses an information need over a passage collection C, and 

d+ ∈ C is a passage judged to address that need; no additional criterion is imposed. Relevance is therefore a single unstructured judgment that does not decompose into separately checkable terms. The scarce resource in this regime is the positive, since relevance judgments are human-annotated and cannot be manufactured. We therefore build on the established supervised collections for dense passage retrieval and treat this paradigm as the semantic substrate for text embedding. 

Instruction-following retrieval. The query is a composition q = x ⊕ c of an underlying request x and a natural-language constraint c, typically bearing on audience, clarity, format, language, length, or source. Relevance is conjunctive: writing d |= φ for the judgment that d satisfies a stated condition φ,rel (q, d) ⇐⇒ (d |= x) ∧ (d |= c), (2) and since the request term is satisfied by many candidates on the same topic, the discriminative signal resides entirely in the second term. An ideal hard negative therefore satisfies d− |= x but d−̸ |= c. With the request held fixed, topical similarity no longer provides a usable cue, compelling the model to represent the constrained attribute c in itself, rather than folding it into the query as additional topical keywords. We collect released supervised train splits on instruction-following tasks, keeping the constraint inline with the request which matches the concatenated form presented at evaluation. 7Reasoning retrieval. Relevance here demands logical inference and multi-hop reasoning beyond keyword matching: the query q poses a problem or presents a case, and d+ supplies the principle, evidence, or precedent under which it is resolved, so the pair is linked by a latent inference r with 

q r

−→ d+. The contrast with general retrieval is that the proposition connecting them—the diagnosis, the applicable theorem—is stated in neither, so no degree of surface or semantic proximity between q and d+

recovers the judgment. We obtain such pairs by recasting generative reasoning corpora into retrieval form, promoting whichever field realizes this relation to d+: a derivation, a supporting passage, or a case drawn from the same source. 

Multi-condition retrieval. The query is an ordered conjunction of atomic conditions, qk = ⟨ f1, . . . , fk⟩,all of which d+ must satisfy jointly. We construct training data by extending the MultiConIR pipeline (Lu et al., 2025). The conditions are extracted from a source document dsrc , so dsrc satisfies them by construc-tion and serves as d+ at no annotation cost, while the query verbalizes the first k of them. For each fj we generate a replacement hj that voids the condition while retaining its salient terms, redeployed so that they no longer license qk, and substitute it into dsrc in isolation, one negative per condition: 

d+ = dsrc , N (qk) = HN j

> kj=1

, HN j := dsrc [ fj → hj]. (3) Each negative thus departs from the positive in exactly one condition and in nothing else. Hardness is certified by construction rather than estimated by a scorer: any representation that compresses a document into a single vector must place HN j within a vanishing margin of dsrc , and closing that margin is precisely what the paradigm asks of the model. 

Long-context retrieval. The task form is an extreme asymmetry, |d+| ≫ | q|, with context length promoted to an explicit variable: what is retrieved is an entire document, but what makes it relevant is a short span inside it. Relevance is thus local while the representation is global, and the capability under test is tolerance of that mismatch—the query–document score must not decay as irrelevant material accumulates around a fixed piece of evidence. The demand sharpens wherever one document answers many distinct queries, each keyed to a different span: a fixed-dimensional embedding then cannot stand for the document by its dominant topic, but must retain numerous local facts at once and keep them separately addressable. What the task probes is therefore long-context understanding rather than semantic matching, and the binding constraint is representational capacity, not discrimination among candidates. Most sub-tasks inherit collections whose documents are natively long; the remainder are synthetic, with length and evidence position set directly. 

Text-retrieval data. To strengthen the model’s retrieval capability, we incorporate RTEB-related training data. In addition to improving text retrieval, this supervision helps the shared embedding space general-ize retrieval capability to images, audio, and video. Following the major specialized domains covered by RTEB (Liu et al., 2025), our data span law, finance, programming, and healthcare, with retrieval relations including legal scenario–statute matching, financial question–report retrieval, natural-language problem–code matching, and medical question–answer retrieval. We construct query–document pairs from naturally occurring relations in domain corpora, such as questions paired with expert answers, programming problems paired with solutions, and legal scenarios linked to relevant statutes or cases. Structured records, financial tables, source code, and long documents are converted into self-contained candidate texts while preserving information important for retrieval. Existing queries are retained when suitable; otherwise, they are derived from annotations or conservatively rewritten from the associated content. Candidate pairs are then checked through rule-based filtering and, where necessary, model-assisted semantic validation. After deduplication, we retrieve lexically similar candidates from the same domain to form hard negatives and supplement them with broader samples when needed. All known positives and near-duplicate candidates are excluded from the negative set to reduce false negatives. Finally, task-specific query instructions and a unified candidate format are applied before mixing the data into training. 

Text data in the wild. To broaden the competence of the shared embedding space beyond retrieval, we further incorporate related training data from Muennighoff et al. (2023). This supervision asks a single representation to support judgments of several kinds at once: category membership, topical grouping, pairwise equivalence, and graded semantic similarity. We therefore organize the data by the task types of MTEB rather than by domain, building direct supervision for classification, clustering, retrieval, and pair classification. Since the training objective is uniformly contrastive, the central problem is not assembling these tasks but casting each of them into a common query–candidate form without distorting what it measures. 8Classification is recast as retrieval over verbalized labels: each label is rendered as a natural-language candidate, so the decision becomes a choice within a small closed candidate set rather than the output of a task head. Clustering data is drawn from a labeled topic hierarchy and stratified over its leaf categories, so that the sampled subset preserves the shape of the label tree, while the duplicate-question and paraphrase collections supply positives directly from their annotations. The decisive quality issue in this group is the negative set: a negative that can be rejected by lexical overlap alone leaves a competent model with almost no loss and therefore no gradient, however well the positive is annotated. We accordingly mine in-domain hard negatives with BGE-M3 (Chen et al., 2024) to replace the weakest random ones. Known positives and near-duplicates are excluded from the negative set, and candidate text is screened at the document level against the evaluation collections before mixing. 

3.5 Agent Data 

We construct agent data for tool retrieval, GUI interaction retrieval, and knowledge retrieval, covering both text and multimodal inputs. 

Tool retrieval. Examples pair user requests with tool or API documentation. Positive tools are iden-tified from relevance annotations, recorded calls, and tools referenced in annotated plans. Candidate documents preserve tool names and functional descriptions, together with parameter specifications and implementation details when available. Both queries and tool candidates are represented as text, with retrieval instructions attached to queries. 

GUI retrieval. GUI data connect user goals, interface states, and interaction trajectories through four relations: goal to trajectory, goal to state, state to state, and trajectory to state. We construct positive pairs from annotated correspondences in interaction records, preserving the associated text, screenshots, and their ordering. This produces retrieval examples in which either side may contain text together with one or more screenshots. 

Knowledge retrieval. The data pair questions about scientific documents with supporting paragraphs. We recover positive passages from evidence annotations and represent each candidate using its section title followed by the paragraph text. Distinct annotated evidence passages associated with the same question are collected together, retaining the document context needed to distinguish supporting evidence from other passages. 

Negative construction. We combine BM25 (Robertson & Zaragoza, 2009) hard-negative mining with provided negatives and sampling. For tool data, provided negatives are retained, and additional hard negatives are selected by descending BM25 scores between queries and candidate documents. Mining prioritizes the same domain or tool category where applicable. Other functions within the associated toolkit also serve as distractors when they are not annotated as positives. For evidence retrieval, we prioritize paragraphs from the same document that rank highly under BM25 but are not annotated as evidence. Insufficient negative sets are supplemented from broader candidate pools using deterministic selection or seeded sampling. GUI data use random negatives, sampled uniformly without replacement from distinct candidates of the same relation type. 

Preprocessing. Duplicate queries are consolidated and candidate pools are deduplicated while preserving internal whitespace, code formatting, and media order. Negative construction excludes all known positives for each query, including alternatives that will not be used as positive supervision. For entries containing multiple positive samples, only the first positive is used during training, and the remaining positives are discarded. 

## 4 Omni-Modal Training 

Our framework comprises four stages. Stage-1 establishes a unified omni-modal embedding space through low-rank pretraining (initialization); Stage 2 refines it through full-parameter finetuning with homogeneous sampling; Stage-3 transfers complementary knowledge through annealing embedding distillation; and Stage-4 enables efficient deployment with elastic embedding dimensions. 

4.1 Stage-1: Low-Rank Pretraining 

In Stage-1, we perform contrastive pretraining on the embedding model using the large-scale, omni-modal, and multi-task training corpus. Throughout this stage we use in-batch mixing , where training instances from all supported modalities and task types are mixed within each global batch and the candidates of each query are gathered across all data-parallel ranks, so that the negatives of every query span modality and task boundaries. 9(a) Broad omni -modal data  (b) Homogeneous -source sampling        

> Text
> The sun sets over
> a serene ocean.
> A golden sky glows.
> Retrieval / reasoning
> Image Video
> Audio
> Speech, music
> and sound events
> Visual docs Text + video + audio
> Find the surfing clip.
> +
> Balanced tuples with upweighted non -text targets
> Dataset A ·image retrieval
> Dataset B ·video retrieval
> Dataset C ·text retrieval
> Dataset D ·audio retrieval
> A bustling city
> street at night
> Crowded market
> with stalls
> Neon lights
> reflec tion
> Within one micro -batch
> Pool in -batch positives
> and explicit negatives
> hash a
> +
> hash b
> -
> hash a
> -
> Hash deduplication
> +-
> hash a hash b
> Informative negatives
> without positive collisions

Figure 4: Data-centric omni-modal training. (a) Our training corpus covers text, images, video, audio, visual documents, and interleaved inputs, with non-text targets upweighted for modality balance. (b) Homogeneous-source sampling draws each micro-batch from one dataset and deduplicates the pooled candidates, yielding task-consistent in-batch negatives without positive collisions. Concretely, each training instance takes the form of a tuple (xi, y+ 

> i

, {y−

> i,k

}Kk=1) consisting of a query, its positive target, and K accompanying hard negatives. Given a mini-batch of N such instances, all in-batch targets and all in-batch hard negatives are pooled into a single candidate set that is shared by every query, i.e. C = {y+ 

> j

}Nj=1 ∪ { y−

> j,k

}N, Kj=1, k=1 of size N(1 + K). Every (query, candidate) pair is scored with the cosine similarity sim (x, y) = e(x)⊤e(y)

∥e(x)∥2 ∥e(y)∥2

, (4) under a temperature τ, the positive probability and the per-query InfoNCE loss (van den Oord et al., 2018) of query xi are 

πi = esim (xi ,y+ 

> i

)/τ

Zi

, ℓi = − log πi, (5) where the partition function Zi sums over the whole shared candidate set. Rather than relying solely on a uniformly averaged InfoNCE objective, our Stage-1 training objective combines two complementary losses: a focal-weighted contrastive loss and an embedding distillation loss .The focal-weighted contrastive loss dynamically reweights queries according to their current retrieval difficulty, reducing the contribution of already well-separated examples and concentrating the optimiza-tion budget on unresolved queries with competitive negatives (Section 4.1.1). In parallel, the embedding distillation loss transfers the teacher’s full similarity distribution over the candidate set, providing graded supervision for both positive and negative candidates instead of the effectively one-hot target used by standard InfoNCE (Hinton et al., 2015). This enables the student to preserve fine-grained relevance relationships and ranking structure that cannot be captured by hard labels alone (Section 4.1.2). Together, the two losses provide complementary supervision: the former determines which queries should receive greater emphasis, while the latter specifies how their candidates should be organized in the embedding space. We introduce the two components in detail below. 

4.1.1 Focal-Weighted Contrastive Loss 

Under a uniformly averaged InfoNCE objective, a query whose positive is already well separated from its negatives occupies the same share of the batch loss as a query whose hard negatives remain competitive. Inspired by focal learning for dense object detection (Lin et al., 2017) and discovery in our recent embedding research (Li et al., 2026b), the focal embedding loss rescales the per-query loss by its current retrieval difficulty, so that queries that are not yet resolved dominate each update. We use the positive probability πi defined in Eq. (5) as the retrieval confidence, with the same candidate set C and temperature τ. The confidence is then mapped to a per-query focal coefficient that is treated as a constant, and the coefficients are normalized to unit mean over the mini-batch: 

ai = sg 

h 1 − πi

γi

, ˜wi = ai 

> 1
> N

∑Nk=1 ak

, (6) where sg [·] denotes the stop-gradient operator and γ ≥ 0 controls the strength of difficulty modulation, with γ = 0 recovering uniform weighting. The focal embedding loss is the resulting reweighted 10 contrastive objective 

Lfocal = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> i=1

˜wi ℓi = − ∑Ni=1 ai log πi

∑Ni=1 ai

. (7) Queries whose positives are angularly well separated from the competing candidates yield high confi-dence πi and are correspondingly downweighted, whereas ambiguous queries with competitive negatives retain large weights. Since the unit-mean normalization keeps the overall loss scale unchanged relative to uniform averaging, the reweighting redistributes rather than inflates the optimization budget across the mini-batch. 

4.1.2 Embedding Distillation Loss 

The standard contrastive objective treats the positive target as a one-hot label and does not explicitly model the relative relevance of the remaining candidates. To provide richer supervision during embedding model initialization, we introduce a distribution loss that transfers the teacher’s full ranking distribution over the candidate set. For each query xi, the teacher distribution is: 

ti(c) = esim T(xi ,c)/τ

# ∑ 

> c′∈C

esim T(xi ,c′ )/τ , c ∈ C (8) where sim T denotes the similarity produced by the teacher embedding model. In practice, the candidate-level log-probabilities log ti(c) are computed offline and stored with each training instance, avoiding teacher-model inference during student training. Using the similarity function defined in Eq. (4), the corresponding student distribution is: 

qi(c) = esim (xi ,c)/τ

# ∑ 

> c′∈C

esim (xi ,c′ )/τ , c ∈ C (9) The teacher and student distributions are constructed with the same candidate ordering and temperature. We then minimize the forward Kullback–Leibler divergence from the teacher distribution to the student distribution: 

ℓKD  

> i

= KL (ti ∥ qi) = ∑

> c∈C

ti(c) log ti(c)

qi(c) ,

Ldist = 1

N

> N

# ∑

> i=1

ℓKD  

> i

.(10) Unlike one-hot supervision, the teacher distribution assigns graded probability mass to both the positive and negative candidates, thereby preserving their relative relevance and difficulty. Minimizing Ldist 

encourages the student to reproduce the teacher’s fine-grained ranking structure rather than merely separating the positive from all negatives. Teacher models may differ across modalities, while their output distributions share the same representation and are optimized through the unified distribution loss above. 

4.1.3 Optimization Objective 

The final Stage-1 objective is a weighted combination of the two terms above, 

Lstage-1 = λfocal Lfocal + λdist Ldist , (11) where Lfocal (Eq. (7)) is the focal-weighted contrastive loss, Ldist is the distribution loss distilled from teacher soft labels, and λfocal , λdist ≥ 0 balance hard-negative-focused contrastive learning against teacher-guided distribution matching. Both terms are computed over the same candidate set C. In all our Stage-1 runs we set λfocal = λdist without further tuning. 

LoRA Protects Early Embeddings: In our training, we first observed that full-parameter updates perform markedly worse than low-rank ones. The reason lies in the initial state of the embeddings: when a base model is first adapted, the new representations carry no meaningful constraints—they sit in a chaotic, arbitrarily organized space. Enabling full-parameter training at this point lets unstable gradients move every weight, causing violent jumps that erode the pretrained semantic structure before the embeddings ever stabilize. LoRA avoids this by confining updates to a low-dimensional subspace, limiting their magnitude and acting as a stabilizing prior. This shields the base model’s knowledge while the embedding space gradually organizes itself—preserving the semantics that make the model useful until the new representations become coherent. 11 4.2 Stage-2: Full-Parameter Homogeneous Finetuning 

After Stage-1 pretraining, the model has acquired basic embedding capabilities and a shared repre-sentation space across all modalities. In this stage, we further finetune it on a smaller collection of higher-quality downstream datasets. We continue to use the InfoNCE loss with in-batch negatives (Eq. (5)), but change the sampling strategy. Unlike Stage-1, where modalities and datasets are thoroughly mixed, Stage-2 restricts all samples within each micro-batch to the same dataset. Accordingly, the focus of training shifts from establishing a unified representation space to refining the model’s representations and fine-grained discrimination. We refer to this strategy as homogeneous-source sampling , abbreviated as homogeneous sampling .Formally, let Bμ denote the micro-batch size and si the source dataset of the i-th instance. A homogeneous micro-batch from dataset d, its deduplicated candidate set, and the resulting batch loss are written as 

Bd =

n

(xi, y+ 

> i

, {y−

> i,k

}Kk=1)

oBμ 

> i=1

, si = d ∀i,

C(Bd) = Dedup hash 



{y+ 

> j

}Bμ 

> j=1

∪ { y−

> j,k

}Bμ, Kj=1, k=1



,

L(Bd) = − 1

Bμ

> Bμ

# ∑

> i=1

log esim (xi ,y+ 

> i)/τ

∑y∈C (Bd ) esim (xi ,y)/τ .(12) When in-batch negatives are enabled, the candidates associated with other instances in the same micro-batch—including their positive and negative candidates—are gathered and used as additional negatives for the current query. In a randomly mixed batch, these instances often come from different modalities or task types. The model may therefore learn shortcuts based on superficial cues such as modality, sentence length, or linguistic style, rather than making fine-grained semantic distinctions. Homogeneous sampling addresses this issue by drawing every instance in a micro-batch from the same dataset, making the gathered negatives more informative and providing stronger supervision for fine-grained discrimination (c.f. Fig. 4). In implementation, we deduplicate candidates by hash. This prevents a gathered negative from being identical to the positive candidate, which would create a false negative, and removes duplicates of the explicit negative candidates. Homogeneity is enforced only within each micro-batch, so an optimization step can still average gradients from different datasets. This reduces update oscillation and mitigates catastrophic forgetting. As a result, homogeneous sampling can be applied beyond dense retrieval to tasks such as classification and clustering, where it also yields consistent improvements. Homogeneous sampling also substantially increases the proportion of regularly shaped micro-batches, since instances from the same dataset usually contain the same number of candidates. This property brings considerable training speedups in frameworks such as MS-SWIFT (Zhao et al., 2025). Compared with random sampling, the strategy improves performance across benchmarks, and the gain grows further as the micro-batch size increases. 

4.3 Stage-3: Annealing Embedding Distillation 

After Stage-2 finetuning, the model’s performance begins to saturate. Limited by the capabilities of the base model and the student’s capacity, continued training on the same data yields little further improvement. To move beyond this limit, we introduce Embedding Distillation (ED), which transfers knowledge from a stronger teacher to the student (see Fig. 5). We first run the teacher on the same training corpus used in Stage-2 and retain only the instances that it solves correctly. We then evaluate the student on the retained instances and divide them according to whether the student succeeds or fails. Student failures are upsampled to form the ED training set, directing more of the training budget toward capabilities for which useful knowledge can be transferred from the teacher. ED retains both in-batch negatives and homogeneous sampling, ensuring that the student receives a sufficiently large set of negatives of moderate difficulty. Because the in-batch candidate pool is formed randomly at each step, its negative distribution continually changes. These additional negatives drawn from the same source allow the student to distill the teacher’s distribution more thoroughly. For each query xi, we use the teacher distribution ti(c) and student distribution qi(c) defined in Equations 8 and 9, evaluated with the teacher, student, and candidate set C of this stage. The per-query distillation loss ℓKD 

> i

is the forward KL divergence defined in Eq. (10), evaluated using the distributions of this stage. We use forward rather than reverse KL because the main InfoNCE objective already concentrates probability 12 (a) Embedding Distillation  (b) Inference -time low -rank decomposition                              

> Complementary expert similarity supervision
> Text
> A forest path
> beneath tall
> green trees.
> Vision Audio Video
> Keep teacher -correct
> training instances
> Upsample student failures
> and retain successes
> Query: Find a forest path.
> c1
> +c2c3
> Teacher πi
> tStudent πi
> s
> c1
> +c2c3c1
> +c2c3
> Forward KL
> Schematic
> Offline preparation ·frozen Stage -2 encoder
> Text
> passage
> Balanced downsampling
> of unit -norm candidates y
> Uncentered moments
> Σm= E[y yT]
> Σ = ∑mpmΣm
> One eigendecomp.
> Σ = VΛ VT
> Shared PCA basis V
> Candidate -only, zero -initialized residual adapters
> for each d < D, preserving pair and neighbor similarities
> Serving / evaluation Fuse rotation + adapter
> Frozen
> encoder
> 2048 -D

P d          

> d×D
> L2 normalize
> zd(v)
> Shared query / candidate d: 128 ·256 ·512 ·1024 One matrix product
> Pd= [(I + Wd)VT]1:d, :
> zd(v) = Pdv / || Pdv|| 2

Figure 5: Embedding-specific training and inference optimization. (a) Embedding Distillation transfers similarity distributions from complementary modality experts, retaining teacher-correct examples and emphasizing student failures through forward KL supervision. (b) A shared PCA basis and lightweight residual adapters produce compact embeddings at multiple dimensions; the rotation and adapter are fused into a single projection for efficient inference. on the positive candidate, while reverse KL is also mode-seeking and therefore partly duplicates this effect. Forward KL instead transfers the teacher’s softer ranking over the full candidate set, providing complementary supervision among both positive and negative candidates. Our experiments reveal a useful trade-off. Student-only InfoNCE training, which resembles annealed training with upsampled hard examples, further improves tasks on which the student is already strong. In contrast, assigning a large fixed weight to KL substantially improves tasks where the student is weak but the teacher is strong. We therefore balance learning across domains with an adaptive, per-query distillation weight determined by the student’s confidence in the positive candidate. Using the InfoNCE loss ℓi defined in Eq. (5), with πi = qi(y+

i ), we define the query difficulty as 

di =



1 − e−ℓi

γ

= ( 1 − πi)γ . (13) where γ > 0 controls how quickly the teacher’s influence decreases as the student becomes more confident. Since di ∈ [0, 1 ], we obtain a bounded distillation weight 

λi = λmin + ( λmax − λmin ) sg [di] , (14) where 0 ≤ λmin ≤ λmax and sg [·] is the stop-gradient operator. The final ED objective is 

LED = 1

N

N

# ∑

i=1

ℓi

| {z }

LsNCE 

+ 1

N

N

# ∑

i=1

λiℓKD 

i . (15) The KL weights are averaged over the fixed batch size N, rather than normalized by their sum, so the overall influence of the teacher can decrease as the student masters more training instances. Confident queries receive weights near λmin , whereas uncertain queries receive stronger teacher supervision approaching λmax . ED further improves performance across omni-modal benchmarks. At the task level, it strengthens areas in which the student is already competitive, such as classification and question answering, while also improving previously weaker capabilities such as retrieval. 

4.4 Stage-4: Elastic Embedding Inference 

Having established a strong shared embedding space through the preceding training stages, we finally turn to adapting the resulting representation for efficient and flexible deployment. Deployed retrieval systems face heterogeneous storage, latency and accuracy budgets, yet training a separate encoder for each configuration is prohibitively expensive. Although Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL) (Kusupati et al., 2022) enables a single encoder to support multiple embedding widths, we observe that incorporating it into multi-objective training can degrade the performance of full-dimensional embeddings. To decouple multi-width adaptation from encoder training, we therefore attach 13 a lightweight adapter after stage-2 training. This adapter makes a single 2,048-dimensional embedding usable at multiple nested widths while preserving the original embedding’s semantic similarity, nearest-neighbor structure and ranking order. Please refer to Fig. 5 for details. 

Task formulation. Let E denote the encoder frozen after above training, producing unit-norm query and candidate embeddings x, y ∈ RD with D = 2048, and let D = {128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048 } be the nested width set. For each d ∈ D with d < D we learn an adapter fd : RD → RD and define the width-d

representation as its renormalized leading prefix, 

z(d)(v) = u1: d

u1: d 2

with u = fd(V⊤v), sim d(x, y) = z(d)(x), z(d)(y) , (16) where V is the shared orthogonal transform of Eq. (18) below. Renormalization is required because truncating a unit-norm vector shrinks its norm, which otherwise breaks the agreement between cosine, inner product and ℓ2 distance. 

Implementation Details. Each adapter is preceded by a shared, training-free orthogonal transform and instantiated as a zero-initialized residual linear map, 

fd( ˜v) = ˜v + Wd ˜v, Wd init = 0, ˜v = V⊤v. (17) 

Hybrid PCA transform. Write C1, . . . , CM for the per-modality candidate pools. For each we estimate the uncentered second moment by balanced downsampling, and mix the moments under a weight vector 

p = ( p1, . . . , pM) with ∑m pm = 1: 

Σ = ∑

> m

pm Ey∼C m

h

y y ⊤i

, Σ = VΛV⊤, μ1 ≥ · · · ≥ μD. (18) Here Λ = diag (μ1, . . . , μD ).Since V is orthogonal, V⊤v is an isometry of RD — a rigid re-expression of the embedding that leaves all inner products, and hence the full-width geometry exactly unchanged. PCA is an established post-hoc compressor for text retrieval (Li et al., 2026c; Tong et al., 2026), but once the corpus is multimodal it is no longer obvious which embeddings the basis should be fitted on. A preliminary probe comparing per-modality PCA subspaces shows that they agree on only a handful of leading directions and diverge rapidly beyond them: prefix capacity is contested, and p is what allocates it. Because the corpora differ in size by orders of magnitude, each pool is downsampled to a common budget; otherwise sample counts, not p, would determine the basis. The mixture is formed over second moments, with a single eigendecomposition taken at the end—averaging per-modality bases would instead yield a non-orthogonal operator and forfeit the invariance established above. Ablating p, we find uniform weights to be a robust default. 

Residual adapter. The PCA basis alone already improves the short widths, but by less than we had expected, so we additionally train a residual adapter in the rotated space. Training is unsupervised: fd is fitted on the candidate corpus {y} alone, queries enter only at evaluation time, and the objective below acts as a proxy for how far the width-d prefix geometry has drifted from the full-width. Each step forms its batch from a single dataset, drawn under a three-level uniform schedule over modality → category → dataset so that every modality receives an equal share of steps. We adopt the unsupervised objective of the Matryoshka-Adaptor (Yoon et al., 2024), which combines a global and a local similarity-preservation term over a batch B against the adapter-free target sim D:

Lpair  

> d

= 1

|B| (|B| − 1) ∑

> i∈B

# ∑  

> j∈B,j̸=i

sim d(yi, yj) − sim D (yi, yj) , (19) 

Ltopk  

> d

= 1

|B| S ∑

> i∈BS

# ∑

> k=1

sim d

 yi, ynk (i)

 − sim D

 yi, ynk (i)

 , (20) 

Ld = Ltopk  

> d

+ α Lpair  

> d

. (21) Eq. (19) compares every pair within a batch against the full-width Gram matrix; as most such pairs are unrelated, it mainly pins down the coarse arrangement of the corpus. Eq. (20) looks only at each anchor and S of its precomputed nearest neighbors, the region where retrieval metrics are actually decided. Both targets are detached, and deviations are measured in ℓ1 by default. Instead of adopting a shallow MLP like Matryoshka-Adaptor, we find that once the skip connection is in place the choice of shallow structure makes little difference, and take the single linear residual map of Eq. (17) as the most economical of the structures we tried. Moreover, linearity lets the width-d embedding fold into a single d × D matrix, 

(I + Wd)V⊤ truncated to its first d rows, so serving one width costs one matrix product. 14 128 256 512 1024 2048 

> Embedding dimension
> 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78
> nDCG@5
> MMEB-VisDoc
> Naive truncation Hybrid PCA only Adapter only Hybrid PCA + adapter (ours)

(a) MMEB-VisDoc (nDCG@5) 128 256 512 1024 2048  

> Embedding dimension
> 50 52 54 56 58
> Task-weighted average
> Average (190 tasks)
> Naive truncation Hybrid PCA only Adapter only Hybrid PCA + adapter (ours)

(b) MMEB-Average 

Figure 6: Performance versus embedding width. We compare naive truncation of the frozen encoder, the hybrid PCA basis alone, the residual adapter alone, and the two combined; (b) averages the six suites with the task weights of Table 7. The components are complementary: the PCA basis carries most of the gain at d ≥ 512, whereas the adapter dominates at d = 128; neither alone matches the combination. 

## 5 Evaluation 

In this section we empirically evaluate Ovis-Embedding across a comprehensive suite of multimodal retrieval benchmarks, with the goal of answering three questions: (i) does a single omni-modal encoder match or surpass strong modality-specialist baselines on each individual modality pair; (ii) which components of the proposed recipe contribute the most to its quality; and (iii) how does the learned representation behave qualitatively on out-of-distribution queries. We first describe the evaluation setup and baselines (Section 5.1), then report the main quantitative results (Section 5.2). 

5.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate Ovis-Embedding on five complementary benchmark families that collectively test vision–language, omni-modal, audio, video, and retrieval-specific representations: • MMEB-v3 (Huang et al., 2026) is our primary omni-modal benchmark. It extends MMEB-v2 to 190 tasks spanning text, images, video, audio, visual documents, and agent-centric scenarios. In addition to conventional classification, question answering, retrieval, and grounding, it includes complex text retrieval, cross-modal retrieval involving audio, and tool, GUI, and memory retrieval. We use it to assess whether Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B provides balanced performance across all supported modalities and application settings. • MMEB-v2 (Jiang et al., 2025) evaluates vision–language embeddings over images, video, and visual documents. Its image tasks cover classification, visual question answering, image retrieval, and visual grounding; its video tasks cover classification, question answering, retrieval, and temporal grounding; and its visual-document tasks evaluate page- and document-level retrieval. We use MMEB-v2 as the principal benchmark for Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B and Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B. • MAEB (Massive Audio Embedding Benchmark) (Assadi et al., 2026a) contains 30 tasks covering speech, music, environmental sounds, bioacoustics, and multilingual audio. It evaluates both acoustic and linguistic information through classification, clustering, pair classification, reranking, audio retrieval, and audio–text alignment. • MVEB (Massive Video Embedding Benchmark) (Assadi et al., 2026b) contains 23 tasks spanning video classification, zero-shot classification, clustering, pair classification, retrieval, and video-centric question answering. It includes both video-only and audio–video settings, allowing us to measure temporal visual understanding as well as the contribution of the accompanying audio stream. • RTEB (Retrieval Embedding Benchmark) (Liu et al., 2025) focuses on text retrieval for realis-tic search and retrieval-augmented generation. It combines open and private evaluation sets across domains such as law, finance, programming, and healthcare, and therefore complements the broad multimodal suites with a dedicated test of retrieval quality and out-of-distribution generalization. 15 We report the official aggregate score for each benchmark rather than constructing a new average across benchmark families. For MMEB-v2 and MMEB-v3, the overall score is the unweighted average over their constituent datasets; we additionally report modality- and task-level breakdowns. MAEB, MVEB, and RTEB are aggregated using their official evaluation implementations. 

Evaluation protocol. All inputs are encoded independently in a bi-encoder setting. For Ovis-Embedding, each query is paired with the task instruction defined by the corresponding benchmark and formatted using the backbone’s native processor and chat template. We extract the final-layer hidden state at the last non-padding token and normalize it to unit length. Candidates are encoded independently in the same way, and rankings are produced by cosine similarity. No answer generation or cross-encoder interaction is used during evaluation: classification labels, candidate answers, passages, and multimodal items are all treated as retrieval candidates in the shared embedding space. We evaluate baselines using their officially released checkpoints, preprocessing pipelines, prompts, and pooling rules, avoiding model-specific disadvantages from imposing a single extraction strategy on architectures with different designs. Each dataset is scored with the metric prescribed by its benchmark. MMEB primarily uses Hit@1 for image, video, audio, and agent tasks and nDCG@5 for text and visual-document retrieval, while RTEB uses nDCG@10 as its default leaderboard metric. MAEB and MVEB use the task-specific metrics implemented in MTEB. Unless otherwise stated, all reported values are multiplied by 100, and the same candidate pools and benchmark splits are used for every compared model. 

Implementation details. We evaluate three Ovis-Embedding variants. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B is initialized from Qwen2.5-Omni-3B and supports text, images, video, audio, and interleaved combinations of these modalities. Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B and Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B are initialized from Qwen3.5-2B and Qwen3.5-9B, respectively, and support text, images, video, and their interleaved combinations. Because no embedding projection head is introduced, the output dimension is inherited from each backbone: 2,048 for Omni-3B and VL-2B, and 4,096 for VL-9B. The models are trained with the three training stages described in Section 4: low-rank pretraining, full-parameter homogeneous finetuning, and annealing embedding distillation. All experiments are conducted on clusters equipped with NVIDIA H100 80 GB GPUs. During evaluation, maximum sequence lengths, image resolution, video frame sampling, audio preprocessing, and other modality-specific settings follow the official benchmark configuration and are fixed across models whenever their native processors permit. 

5.2 Omni-3B Results 

We evaluate Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B on three complementary omni-modal benchmark suites. MMEB-v3 measures general-purpose embedding quality across image, video, visual-document, text, audio, and agent tasks, whereas MAEB and MVEB provide more focused evaluations of audio and video representations, respectively. We also evaluate our Omni-3B model on broader text benchmarks (e.g. RTEB) to show our generalization ability. Together, these benchmarks test not only whether a single 3B model can cover heterogeneous modalities, but also whether it retains the modality-specific discrimination required by classification, retrieval, clustering, reranking, and question answering. All reported scores are percentages, and higher is better. 

5.2.1 MMEB-v3 

Table 1 compares Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B with representative omni-modal embedding models on MMEB-v3. The benchmark covers six evaluation groups—image, video, visual document, text, audio, and agent—and therefore provides a direct test of whether a single compact model can maintain strong performance across heterogeneous modalities and retrieval settings. 

Overall performance. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B achieves an overall score of 58.46 , exceeding the strongest baseline, Tianmu-Emb-Uni (TianmuLab, n.d.) (53.27), by 5.19 points. It also outperforms e5-omni-7B (47.14) and Omni-Embed-Nemotron-3B (Xu et al., 2025b) (43.60) by 11.32 and 14.86 points, respectively, despite using only 3B parameters. More importantly, Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B ranks first on the aggregate score of every evaluation group: 77.55 on image, 64.99 on video, 78.26 on visual documents, 47.15 on text, 50.08 on audio, and 45.52 on agent tasks. The corresponding margins over the second-best model are 3.72, 5.62, 2.89, 3.53, 7.04, and 6.10 points. This consistent advantage shows that the overall gain does not arise from a single dominant modality, but from broadly improved representations across the full MMEB-v3 task spectrum. 16 Table 1: Results on MMEB-v3. We compare Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B with representative omni-modal embedding models across six modalities and their constituent sub-tasks. Scores are reported as percentages. The best and second-best results in each row are shown in bold and underlined, respectively.                                                                                                                                                              

> Modality Sub-task Model Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B
> LCO-Embedding-Omni-7B omni-embed-nemotron-3b e5-omni-7B Tianmu-Emb-Uni (8B)
> IMG
> Overall 77.55 56.27 43.42 70.50 73.83 I-CLS 76.83 57.97 48.31 68.19 65.99 I-QA 77.70 51.83 19.90 70.30 78.00
> I-RET 72.86 53.88 56.06 69.65 72.35 I-VG 94.17 70.90 48.90 79.55 87.80
> VID
> Overall 64.99 53.03 41.36 50.83 59.37 V-CLS 80.26 58.11 48.31 53.86 66.95 V-QA 67.73 62.36 47.81 65.89 67.51 V-RET 52.05 42.23 38.68 40.50 50.21 V-MRET 56.57 46.99 23.50 37.88 48.43
> VISDOC
> Overall 78.26 69.19 72.27 75.37 72.03 ViDoRe-V1 86.67 80.08 84.76 87.33 83.69 ViDoRe-V2 56.22 54.14 51.57 58.33 53.19 VisRAG 85.81 79.55 85.39 87.60 83.50 VisDoc-OOD 67.94 41.47 42.04 44.19 44.49
> TXT
> Overall 47.15 32.40 39.23 26.93 43.62 FollowIR 53.96 37.39 31.74 26.41 39.03 R2MED 25.68 12.27 17.76 18.95 28.09
> InfoSearch 75.08 59.25 48.37 49.90 51.20 BRIGHT 15.66 7.62 13.60 7.30 15.70
> LongEmbed 64.00 12.57 50.03 9.71 58.49 MultiConIR 61.73 61.36 69.67 56.93 63.42 NanoBEIR 61.59 52.12 56.92 35.88 62.05 AUD
> Overall 50.08 43.17 36.52 43.04 38.94 A-CLS 73.30 64.33 53.69 63.00 69.33 A-RET 30.73 25.53 22.21 26.41 13.62
> AGENT
> Overall 45.52 27.84 36.53 36.67 39.42 Tool 47.56 29.05 38.05 37.45 42.21 GUI 44.59 24.98 32.04 37.96 35.64 Memory 29.44 22.98 32.23 27.29 22.58
> ALL Overall 58.46 43.14 43.60 47.14 53.27

Image and video. On image tasks, Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B obtains the best results on classification (76.83), retrieval (72.86), and visual grounding (94.17), with particularly clear gains of 8.64 points on classification and 6.37 points on grounding over the respective runners-up. Its image-QA score of 77.70 is only 0.30 points below the best result, indicating that the improvement in retrieval-oriented tasks does not come at the expense of visual question answering. The advantage is even more consistent for video: our model ranks first on all four sub-tasks, reaching 80.26 on classification, 67.73 on video QA, 52.05 on retrieval, and 56.57 on moment retrieval. Compared with the second-best results, the gains are 13.31 points for video classification and 8.14 points for moment retrieval, demonstrating strong recognition of both video semantics and temporal structure. 

Visual-document and text retrieval. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B achieves the best visual-document aggregate score of 78.26. Although e5-omni-7B remains slightly stronger on ViDoRe-V1, ViDoRe-V2, and VisRAG, our model is competitive on these established suites and substantially improves VisDoc-OOD to 67.94—23.45 points above the second-best result. This large out-of-distribution gain suggests stronger transfer beyond the document distributions represented by the standard benchmarks. On text, our model leads overall with 47.15 and performs particularly well on FollowIR (53.96), InfoSearch (75.08), and LongEmbed (64.00), outperforming the corresponding runners-up by 14.93, 23.88, and 5.51 points. It is also close to the best results on R2MED, BRIGHT, and NanoBEIR. MultiConIR is the main exception: its score of 61.73 trails Omni-Embed-Nemotron-3B by 7.94 points, indicating that retrieval under multiple simultaneous constraints remains an area for further improvement. 17 Table 2: Comparison with the top-ranked models on MAEB(beta). Scores are percentages and are aggregated according to the official task types. Rows are ordered by Mean(Task) from low to high. “Rank” denotes the Borda rank after inserting the locally evaluated Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B results. Best results among the models shown are in bold . PC = Audio Pair Classification; M.Clf = Audio Multilabel Classification; Retr = Any-to-Any Retrieval; AC = Audio Classification; ZS-Clf = Audio Zero-shot Classification; Clust = Audio Clustering; Rerank = Audio Reranking.                                                                                                                          

> Model Overall TaskType Aggregation Rank Mean(Task) Mean(Type) PC M.Clf Retr AC ZS-Clf Clust Rerank
> Qwen2-Audio-7B 734.54 37.01 56.89 32.64 5.29 58.34 12.38 12.65 80.85 larger_clap_general 834.98 41.08 51.89 80.63 18.91 47.88 14.87 6.62 66.78 OmniEmbed-v0.1 443.87 47.90 58.90 68.87 41.95 49.06 30.16 3.22 83.14 e5-omni-3B 11 48.00 51.60 59.48 51.54 51.21 48.19 64.43 1.86 84.47 jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano 10 50.14 55.31 65.56 70.83 50.03 51.34 60.26 5.96 83.19 jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small 550.41 55.58 65.38 69.26 49.76 51.99 62.16 6.13 84.38 LCO-Embedding-Omni-3B 952.25 55.50 66.66 74.05 54.55 54.46 62.17 1.27 75.37 BidirLM-Omni-2.5B-Embedding 652.36 54.52 66.75 60.95 47.47 59.77 65.77 6.18 74.76 e5-omni-7B 252.45 57.12 65.54 68.78 56.07 52.17 68.81 1.78 86.70
> LCO-Embedding-Omni-7B 353.54 57.06 67.30 75.74 55.23 56.24 64.54 1.66 78.71
> Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B 157.29 61.22 67.62 78.67 61.37 56.26 66.31 17.59 80.70

Audio and agent tasks. The largest modality-level margin appears on audio, where Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B reaches 50.08 overall, 7.04 points above the next-best model. It leads both audio classification (73.30) and audio retrieval (30.73), improving over the respective runners-up by 3.97 and 4.32 points. These results show that the model preserves discriminative acoustic information while also aligning audio with the shared retrieval space. On agent tasks, our model achieves the best overall score of 45.52, supported by leading results on tool retrieval (47.56) and GUI retrieval (44.59). It ranks second on memory retrieval with 29.44, 2.79 points behind Omni-Embed-Nemotron-3B, suggesting that long-horizon memory matching remains complementary to the model’s strengths in tool and interface understanding. 

Summary. Across the 31 aggregate and sub-task entries in Table 1, Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B ranks first on 22 and second on 8; MultiConIR is the only entry on which it falls outside the top two. Taken together, the results establish Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B as a strong compact omni-modal embedder: it combines state-of-the-art overall performance with balanced modality coverage, while its remaining gaps are concentrated in a small number of fine-grained document, multi-condition text, and memory retrieval tasks. 

5.2.2 MAEB & MVEB 

We further evaluate on the beta versions of the Massive Audio Embedding Benchmark (MAEB) and the Massive Video Embedding Benchmark (MVEB). MAEB evaluates audio representations across 30 tasks covering speech, music, environmental sounds, and audio–text matching, organized into seven task types. MVEB comprises 23 video tasks spanning zero-shot and supervised classification, retrieval, clustering, pair classification, and video-centric question answering. These two suites complement MMEB-v3 by probing whether a unified embedding space preserves fine-grained acoustic and temporal information. Consistent with the official leaderboard 2, Tables 2 and 3 report both the average over individual tasks (Mean(Task)) and the average over task-type aggregates (Mean(Type)). Since Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B has not yet been submitted to the official leaderboard, the displayed ranks are estimated by inserting our local results into the leaderboard snapshot and recomputing its task-level Borda ranking. 

MAEB results. As shown in Table 2, Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B achieves the highest Mean(Task) score of 57.29 and Mean(Type) score of 61.22 . These results exceed the strongest competing scores by 3.75 and 4.10 points, respectively, and place the model first under the estimated Borda ranking. The gain is broad rather than confined to one task family: Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B obtains the best pair-classification (67.62), retrieval (61.37), and clustering (17.59) results among the models shown. In particular, it improves retrieval by 5.30 points and clustering by 4.94 points over the corresponding runners-up. It is also competitive on multilabel and zero-shot classification, while audio classification and reranking remain below the best specialized results. Overall, the strong task- and type-level averages indicate balanced 

> 2https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard

18 Table 3: Comparison with the top-ranked models on MVEB(beta). Scores are percentages and are aggregated according to the official task types. Rows are ordered by Mean(Task) from low to high. “Rank” denotes the Borda rank after inserting the locally evaluated Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B results. Best results among the models shown are in bold . V-ZS = Video Zero-shot Classification; V-Clf = Video Classification; Retr = Any-to-Any Retrieval; V-Clust = Video Clustering; V-PC = Video Pair Classification; V-QA = Video-Centric Question Answering.                                                                                                              

> Model Overall TaskType Aggregation Rank Mean(Task) Mean(Type) V-ZS V-Clf Retr V-Clust V-PC V-QA
> BidirLM-Omni-2.5B-Embedding 951.20 52.05 53.95 61.24 45.48 17.11 78.75 55.80 pe-av-small 11 52.18 45.64 35.43 54.78 57.64 22.91 75.31 27.80 OmniEmbed-v0.1 752.92 50.89 48.49 58.45 52.88 20.63 74.67 50.20 pe-av-base 10 53.09 46.31 34.56 54.84 59.58 22.58 75.74 30.60 pe-av-large 854.25 46.81 37.89 54.82 62.00 21.71 75.25 29.20 LCO-Embedding-Omni-3B 454.56 54.51 52.74 56.13 54.08 27.01 80.70 56.40 e5-omni-7B 354.99 51.17 50.18 54.73 59.44 21.54 77.32 43.80 ebind-audio-vision 555.46 50.27 61.06 51.34 62.30 20.10 75.39 31.40 ebind-full 555.46 50.27 61.06 51.34 62.30 20.10 75.39 31.40 LCO-Embedding-Omni-7B 257.58 56.23 55.46 59.23 58.71 27.35 79.63 57.00
> Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B 161.77 59.72 63.94 63.61 63.53 25.35 83.30 58.60

Table 4: RTEB and MMEB-Text results. RTEB results are reported on the 15-task English public split and grouped by domain; its average is computed over all 15 tasks. MMEB-Text reports the overall mean over 53 tasks. The best result in each column is in bold , and the second-best is underlined.                                            

> Model Size MMEB-Text RTEB Overall Overall Legal Code Healthcare Finance
> jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small 1.6B 45.38 63.42 54.09 66.05 64.06 66.15 Qwen3-VL-Embedding-2B 2.1B 39.20 61.48 54.98 62.85 62.16 64.30 LCO-Embedding-Omni-3B 3B 35.23 51.82 40.35 56.11 51.00 53.79 Qwen3-Embedding-4B 4B 46.22 67.27 62.67 68.47 66.22 69.75
> Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B 3B 47.15 67.35 49.61 69.89 66.13 80.00

audio representations across both semantic matching and acoustic discrimination settings. 

MVEB results. Table 3 shows a similarly consistent advantage on video understanding. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B reaches 61.77 Mean(Task) and 59.72 Mean(Type), outperforming the second-best model, LCO-Embedding-Omni-7B, by 4.19 and 3.49 points despite its smaller parameter count. It achieves the best score in five of the six task types: zero-shot classification (63.94), video classification (63.61), retrieval (63.53), pair classification (83.30), and video QA (58.60). Video clustering is the only exception, where its score of 25.35 is 2.00 points below the best result. This profile suggests that the learned representation captures both global video semantics and cross-modal audio-visual correspondence, while leaving some room for improvement in unsupervised category structure. 

5.2.3 RTEB & MMEB-Text 

Finally, we compare with more text-specific model to verify where a omni model can behave well on broader text search scenarios. Table 4 evaluates text retrieval on two complementary benchmarks. RTEB targets retrieval in specialised, real-world domains; we report its 15-task English public split and group the task scores into legal, code, healthcare, and finance domains. MMEB-Text provides a broader evaluation over 53 text-retrieval tasks drawn from seven benchmark families, for which we report only the overall score. Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B achieves the best overall results on both RTEB (67.35) and MMEB-Text (47.15), outperforming all compared omni-modal and vision-language embedding models. Notably, it also slightly surpasses Qwen3-Embedding-4B, a larger model dedicated to text embedding, which scores 67.27 on RTEB and 46.22 on MMEB-Text. These results show that the broader modality coverage of Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B does not compromise its text retrieval quality. 19 Table 5: Results on MMEB-v2. We compare Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B with representative vision–language embedding models across image, video, and visual-document retrieval tasks. The baselines include seed1.6-embedding-1215 (ByteDance Seed Team, 2025), Qwen3-VL-Embedding-8B (Li et al., 2026a), DME-Medium (Chen et al., 2026), and Octen-VL-Embedding-Large (Octen, n.d.). Scores are reported as percentages. Overall is the unweighted average over all 78 constituent datasets. The best and second-best results in each row are shown in bold and underlined, respectively.                                                                                   

> Modality Sub-task Model Ovis-VL-Embedding-9B
> seed1.6-embedding-1215 Qwen3-VL-Embedding-8B DME-Medium Octen-VL-Embedding-Large
> IMG
> Overall 83.96 77.99 80.12 79.76 81.86 I-CLS 80.11 75.05 74.19 74.48 75.68 I-QA 86.72 74.89 81.14 80.94 84.53 I-RET 81.03 79.33 80.16 78.23 80.62 I-VG 95.47 89.05 92.30 94.55 94.40
> VID
> Overall 72.90 67.74 67.15 70.79 75.95
> V-CLS 88.41 85.19 78.39 87.69 87.09 V-QA 72.50 66.71 70.96 71.03 82.14
> V-RET 62.61 59.09 58.73 60.99 67.99
> V-MRET 64.86 54.79 56.09 58.53 60.36
> VISDOC
> Overall 83.06 82.38 82.36 82.02 80.54 ViDoRe-V1 91.22 90.90 87.21 87.62 85.90 ViDoRe-V2 61.00 60.31 69.86 57.79 66.34 VisRAG 91.19 89.96 88.68 94.50 86.64 VisDoc-OOD 72.50 71.76 73.27 73.54 72.16
> ALL Overall 81.13 76.97 77.82 78.38 80.09

5.3 VL-9B & VL-2B Results 

Having established the omni-modal performance of Ovis-Embedding-Omni-3B, we now turn to the vision–language variants and evaluate the proposed approach at two model scales. Specifically, we report the MMEB-v2 results of Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B and Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B, focusing on their overall performance, modality-specific strengths, and scaling behavior. Tables 5 and 6 compare the 9B and 2B variants of Ovis-Embedding-VL with representative models of sim-ilar scale on MMEB-v2. Both variants achieve the best aggregate score within their respective comparison groups. Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B reaches an overall score of 81.13, outperforming the strongest selected baseline, Octen-VL-Embedding-Large, by 1.04 points. Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B obtains 77.46, exceeding Octen-VL-Embedding by 2.04 points. Since the overall metric averages all 78 constituent datasets rather than the three modality-level scores, these gains indicate broadly balanced improvements rather than dominance on only a small subset of tasks. 

Image tasks. The clearest advantage of both variants appears on image tasks. The 9B model achieves an IMG average of 83.96, improving upon the next-best result by 2.10 points, while the 2B model ob-tains 80.62 with a larger margin of 3.21 points. Both variants rank first on all four image sub-tasks: classification, question answering, retrieval, and visual grounding. Overall, these results demonstrate par-ticularly strong visual semantic discrimination and question-guided matching, together with consistently competitive performance across all four image sub-tasks. 

Video tasks. On the more competitive video suite, Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B and Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B achieve VID averages of 72.90 and 67.12, respectively. Both variants perform particularly strongly on tasks that require temporal localization: each ranks first on video moment retrieval, with scores of 64.86 and 57.63 for the 9B and 2B models. Both variants also obtain the best video classification result in their respective comparison groups. Performance on the remaining video tasks is competitive and suggests further potential for strengthening broad temporal-semantic matching. 

Visual-document tasks. On visual-document tasks, Ovis-Embedding-VL-9B and Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B achieve the best modality-level averages in their respective comparison groups, with scores of 83.06 and 80.47. Both variants also lead on ViDoRe-V1, while the 2B model obtains the strongest result on out-of-distribution document retrieval. Taken together, the results show robust document representations 20 Table 6: Results on MMEB-v2. We compare Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B with representative vision–language embedding models across image, video, and visual-document retrieval tasks. The baselines include UEmbed-2B (dense) (Song et al., 2026), Qwen3-VL-Embedding-2B (Li et al., 2026a), DME-Small (Chen et al., 2026), and Octen-VL-Embedding (Octen, n.d.). Scores are reported as percentages. Overall is the unweighted average over all 78 constituent datasets. The best and second-best results in each row are shown in bold and underlined, respectively.                                                                                   

> Modality Sub-task Model Ovis-Embedding-VL-2B
> UEmbed-2B (dense) Qwen3-VL-Embedding-2B DME-Small Octen-VL-Embedding
> IMG
> Overall 80.62 67.76 74.96 75.91 77.41 I-CLS 76.87 59.21 70.34 68.63 71.49 I-QA 82.05 67.91 74.27 76.21 78.90 I-RET 77.69 68.81 74.85 75.59 76.37 I-VG 95.17 85.58 88.55 94.30 91.58
> VID
> Overall 67.12 49.96 61.87 65.63 68.84
> V-CLS 85.32 56.26 71.94 84.46 79.08 V-QA 64.86 52.76 64.94 61.90 73.61
> V-RET 56.87 45.76 53.88 55.48 61.34
> V-MRET 57.63 41.78 53.26 57.38 56.33
> VISDOC
> Overall 80.47 76.99 79.22 79.86 77.38 ViDoRe-V1 88.87 82.31 84.37 86.99 82.45 ViDoRe-V2 57.08 59.89 65.34 56.24 63.03 VisRAG 89.05 85.60 86.43 90.32 84.14 VisDoc-OOD 70.02 67.90 69.41 69.98 68.87
> ALL Overall 77.46 66.49 73.25 74.75 75.42

across both model sizes, while multilingual and domain-diverse document retrieval offers a promising direction for further improvement. 

Scaling behavior. Comparing the two Ovis variants directly further highlights the effect of model scale. Moving from 2B to 9B improves the overall score by 3.67 points, with gains of 3.34 on IMG, 5.78 on VID, and 2.59 on VISDOC. The largest sub-task improvements occur on video question answering (+7.64), video moment retrieval ( +7.23), and video retrieval ( +5.74). Thus, additional capacity benefits all three modalities, but contributes most strongly to temporal understanding and matching, which require integrating information across longer and more complex visual sequences. 

## 6 Related Work 

We situate Ovis-Embedding in three complementary lines of prior research. The first concerns dense text embedding models, which establish the contrastive recipe and the prompt-based pooling strategies that we inherit. The second covers multimodal and unified embedding models, which extend such recipes beyond text but typically remain centered on the image–text pair. The third surveys multimodal large language models, whose hidden states have recently emerged as a strong backbone for embedding extraction and which provide the immediate point of departure for Ovis-Embedding. 

Text Embedding Models. Dense text embeddings have progressed rapidly from static word vectors through sentence transformers to LLM-based encoders. DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020) popularized dual-encoder contrastive training for open-domain question answering. E5 (Wang et al., 2022) and GTE (Li et al., 2023) demonstrated that a single model can span classification, clustering, retrieval and semantic similarity tasks when trained with a large-scale weakly-supervised contrastive corpus and a multi-stage recipe. BGE-M3 (Chen et al., 2024) further pushed the frontier by simultaneously supporting multi-linguality, multi-functionality (dense, sparse, and multi-vector retrieval), and multi-granularity (up to 8k tokens), achieving state-of-the-art results across multiple language families. More recently, LLM-based embedding models such as E5-Mistral (Wang et al., 2024a) and NV-Embed (Lee et al., 2024) have shown that decoder-only architectures can serve as generalist embedding backbones when equipped with instruction-based task prompts and last-token pooling, achieving state-of-the-art results on the MTEB benchmark (Muennighoff et al., 2023). Our training recipe inherits many ideas from this line— prompt-based pooling, multi-stage contrastive pretraining, on-policy hard-negative mining (Xiong et al., 2021)—and extends them from a text-only setting to a native omni-modal one. 21 Multimodal Embedding Models. Extending dense retrieval beyond text has primarily been explored through CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and its successors (SigLIP Zhai et al., 2023, Jina-CLIP Koukounas et al., 2024), which train dual-encoder image–text models on web-scale data. A series of follow-up works (Li et al., 2026b) have repurposed vision–language models (VLMs) for embedding extraction. VLM2Vec (Jiang et al., 2024) finetunes VLMs on the MMEB benchmark and achieves 10–20% absolute gains over prior approaches; its recent successor VLM2Vec-V2 (Jiang et al., 2025) scales this paradigm to larger backbones with improved training data. GME (Zhang et al., 2024b) builds on Qwen2-VL (Wang et al., 2024b) and proposes unified multimodal retrieval that supports text-only, image-only and interleaved text–image queries. Qwen3-VL-Embedding (Li et al., 2026a) extends the Qwen3-VL family to embedding tasks, achieving state-of-the-art performance on vision-language benchmarks (MMEB, ViDoRe) but without native audio support. The most recent wave of work has pursued omni-modal embeddings that cover text, image, video, and audio within a single model. LCO-Embedding-Omni (Xiao et al., 2026) introduces learned compression tokens to unify modalities into a compact embedding space, reporting strong audio results but weaker vision scores. e5-omni (Wang et al., 2025) adapts a multimodal LLM for omni-modal embeddings via modality-aware contrastive learning. Conan-embedding-v3 (Li et al., 2025) leverages large-scale negative mining and curriculum training to achieve leading performance on both MMEB and MAEB benchmarks. jina-embeddings-v5 (Günther et al., 2025) proposes a multi-task architecture supporting text, image, and audio embeddings. In the audio domain, CLAP (Wu et al., 2023) applies contrastive language–audio pretraining to align audio and text in a shared space, but remains limited to the audio–text pair. A common limitation shared by these recent omni-modal systems is that they either (i) rely on separate modality adapters bolted onto a text backbone, or (ii) sacrifice performance on one modality (typi-cally vision) to accommodate audio. Our work departs from this pattern by adopting Qwen-Omni as backbone—a model that natively processes text, image, audio, and video within a single Thinker module—enabling genuine joint fusion rather than late-stage modality concatenation. 

Benchmarks. The Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB) (Muennighoff et al., 2023) established a standardized evaluation for text embeddings spanning eight task categories. VLM2Vec (Jiang et al., 2024) introduced Massive Multimodal Embedding Benchmark (MMEB), a 36-dataset suite that extends MTEB-style evaluation to multimodal inputs covering classification, VQA, retrieval and visual grounding. In this paper we evaluate our models on these benchmarks, complemented by the Massive Audio Embedding Benchmark (MAEB) (Assadi et al., 2026a) and the Massive Video Embedding Benchmark (MVEB) (Assadi et al., 2026b) for focused evaluation of audio and video representations. Full details of all benchmark configurations are given in Appendix A. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We presented Ovis-Embedding, a universal embedding family combining native multimodal backbones, data-centric training, and embedding-specific optimization. The family achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance on MMEB-v3, MMEB-v2, MAEB, and MVEB, with flexible embedding dimensions for efficient deployment. These results motivate further exploration of native omni-modal models as a foundation for universal retrieval. 

## Authors and Contributions 

Core Contributors. Ke Zhu, Yawen Liu, Wenjun Yan, Yuwei Hu, Xin Wang 

Contributors. Jin Tong, Wei Zhou, Yibo Wang, Liwei Liu, Dawei Yan, Yanping Li, Jiaming Chen 

Project Leaders. Guangda Huzhang, Qing-Guo Chen, Zhao Xu, Weihua Luo 

## References 

Adnan El Assadi, Isaac Chung, Chenghao Xiao, Roman Solomatin, Animesh Jha, Rahul Chand, Silky Singh, Kaitlyn Wang, Ali Sartaz Khan, Marc Moussa Nasser, et al. Maeb: Massive audio embedding benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16008 , 2026a. Adnan El Assadi, Roman Solomatin, Isaac Chung, Chenghao Xiao, Deep Shah, Manan Dey, Shriya Sud-hakar, Zacharie Bugaud, Wissam Siblini, Ayush Sunil Munot, et al. Mveb: Massive video embedding benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.14958 , 2026b. 22 ByteDance Seed Team. Seed1.6-Embedding-1215. Volcano Engine Model Ark, 2025. URL https://console.volcengine.com/ark/region:ark+cn-beijing/model/detail?Id= doubao-embedding-vision . Model ID: doubao-embedding-vision; accessed September 14, 2026. Haonan Chen, Chu Li, Zhicheng Wang, Yuanwei Liu, Yuanjiang Wang, Shaohua Jiang, and Zhicheng Dou. Douyin multimodal embedding model technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.02148 , 2026. Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. BGE M3-embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03216 , 2024. Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. Deep neural networks for youtube recommendations. In 

Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on recommender systems , pp. 191–198, 2016. Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009. Michael Günther et al. jina-embeddings-v5: Multimodal embeddings for any task, any modality. arXiv preprint , 2025. Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015. Haohang Huang, Xuan Lu, Mingyi Su, Xuan Zhang, Ziyan Jiang, Ping Nie, Kai Zou, Tomas Pfister, Wenhu Chen, Wei Zhang, et al. Mmeb-v3: Measuring the performance gaps of omni-modality embedding models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.23321 , 2026. Ziyan Jiang, Rui Meng, Xinyi Yang, Semih Yavuz, Yingbo Zhou, and Wenhu Chen. VLM2Vec: Training vision-language models for massive multimodal embedding tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05160 ,2024. Ziyan Jiang et al. VLM2Vec-V2: Scaling vision-language models for universal multimodal embedding. 

arXiv preprint , 2025. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas O ˘ guz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2020. Andreas Koukounas, Nikos Georgoudis, Michael Günther, Nan Bo, Georgios Mastrapas, Saba Sturua, Bo Wang, Diego Saez-Trumper, and Han Xiao. Jina CLIP: Your CLIP model is also your text retriever. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20204 , 2024. Aditya Kusupati, Gantavya Bhatt, Aniket Rege, Matthew Wallingford, Aditya Sinha, Vivek Ramanujan, William Howard-Snyder, Kaifeng Chen, Sham Kakade, Prateek Jain, and Ali Farhadi. Matryoshka representation learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pp. 30233– 30249, 2022. Chankyu Lee, Rajarshi Roy, Menber Xu, Jonathan Raiman, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, and Wei Han. NV-Embed: Improved techniques for training LLMs as generalist embedding models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17428 , 2024. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459–9474, 2020. Mingxin Li, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Keqin Chen, Sibo Song, Shuai Bai, Zhibo Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, et al. Qwen3-vl-embedding and qwen3-vl-reranker: A unified framework for state-of-the-art multimodal retrieval and ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04720 , 2026a. Shiyu Li et al. Conan-embedding: General text embedding with more and better negative samples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14919 , 2025. Yanping Li, Wei Zhou, Yawen Liu, Yibo Wang, Ke Zhu, Guangda Huzhang, Qing-Guo Chen, Zhao Xu, Jun Zhang, and Wei Wei. Pace: Progressive angular-to-norm contrastive embedding, 2026b. Yongkang Li, Panagiotis Eustratiadis, and Evangelos Kanoulas. Spectral tempering for embedding compression in dense passage retrieval. In Proceedings of the 49th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’26) , 2026c. 23 Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, and Min Zhang. Towards general text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281 , 2023. Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014. Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 2980–2988, 2017. Frank Liu, Kenneth Enevoldsen, Roman Solomatin, Isaac Chung, Tom Aarsen, and Zoltán F˝ odi. In-troducing RTEB: A new standard for retrieval evaluation. Hugging Face Blog, October 2025. URL 

https://huggingface.co/blog/rteb .Xuan Lu, Sifan Liu, Bochao Yin, Yongqi Li, Xinghao Chen, Hui Su, Yaohui Jin, Wenjun Zeng, and Xiaoyu Shen. MultiConIR: Towards multi-condition information retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pp. 13471–13494, 2025. Minesh Mathew, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and CV Jawahar. Docvqa: A dataset for vqa on document images. In 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pp. 2199–2208. IEEE, 2021. Minesh Mathew, Viraj Bagal, Rubèn Tito, Dimosthenis Karatzas, Ernest Valveny, and CV Jawahar. Infographicvqa. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pp. 2582–2591. IEEE, 2022. Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Loïc Magne, and Nils Reimers. MTEB: Massive text embedding benchmark. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL) , 2023. Octen. VL Embedding. Octen Documentation, n.d. URL https://docs.octen.ai/api-reference/ vl-embedding . Accessed 2026-09-11. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pp. 1–22, 2023. Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents, February 2026. URL https://qwen.ai/blog? id=qwen3.5 .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond. 

Foundations and trends® in information retrieval , 4(1-2):1–174, 2009. Amanpreet Singh, Vivek Natarajan, Meet Shah, Yu Jiang, Xinlei Chen, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Marcus Rohrbach. Towards vqa models that can read. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 8309–8318. IEEE, 2019. Tingyu Song, Mingxin Li, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, Zhijie Nie, Yilun Zhao, and Shu Wu. UEmbed: Unified sparse and dense multimodal embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.02583 ,2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.02583 .TianmuLab. Tianmu-Emb-Uni-8B. Hugging Face model card, n.d. URL https://huggingface.co/ TianmuLab/Tianmu-Emb-Uni . Accessed 2026-09-11. Jin Tong, Guang Liang, Peilin Sun, and Jianxin Wu. Colinearity decay: Training quantization-friendly vits with outlier decay, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.01330 .Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018. C. Wah, S. Branson, P. Welinder, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03533 , 2022. 24 Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. E5-Mistral: Improving text embeddings with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00368 , 2024a. Liang Wang et al. E5-Omni: Omni-modal embeddings via multimodal LLM adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07242 , 2025. Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Lin, Wenbin Chang, et al. Qwen2-VL: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024b. Yusong Wu, Ke Chen, Tianyu Zhang, Yuchen Hui, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov. Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-to-caption augmentation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06687 , 2023. Chenghao Xiao, Hou Pong Ken Chan, Hao Zhang, Weiwen Xu, Mahani Aljunied, and Yu Rong. Scaling language-centric omnimodal representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,38:158370–158401, 2026. Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Sun database: Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In 2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 3485–3492. IEEE, 2010. Lee Xiong, Jamie Callan, and Tie-Yan Liu. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. Jin Xu et al. Qwen2.5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20215 , 2025a. Mengyao Xu, Wenfei Zhou, Yauhen Babakhin, Gabriel Moreira, Ronay Ak, Radek Osmulski, Bo Liu, Even Oldridge, and Benedikt Schifferer. Omni-embed-nemotron: A unified multimodal retrieval model for text, image, audio, and video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03458 , 2025b. Jinsung Yoon, Rajarishi Sinha, Sercan O. Arik, and Tomas Pfister. Matryoshka-adaptor: Unsupervised and supervised tuning for smaller embedding dimensions. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 10318–10336, 2024. Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15343 , 2023. Sheng Zhang, Yanbo Liang, Bowen Gong, Zhiliang Jiang, Shuohang Sun, Yu Hou, Bill Dolan, and Jianfeng Gao. MM-Embed: Universal multimodal retrieval with multimodal LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02571 , 2024a. Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Li, Wen Zhang, Dingkun Long, and Pengjun Xie. GME: Improving universal multimodal retrieval by multimodal LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16855 , 2024b. Yanzhao Zhang et al. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 , 2025. Yuze Zhao, Jintao Huang, Jinghan Hu, Xingjun Wang, Yunlin Mao, Daoze Zhang, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhikai Wu, Baole Ai, Ang Wang, et al. Swift: a scalable lightweight infrastructure for fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 29733–29735, 2025. 25 Table 7: Task performance at five nested widths. Our full pipeline evaluated on the six MMEB-v3 suites. The 2, 048 column is the frozen encoder itself rather than a separate run: adapters are fitted only for 

d < D, and the PCA basis is orthogonal, so the full-width representation is unchanged. Retention is that average relative to 2, 048; the last two rows give naive truncation of the same encoder and our gain over it.                                                               

> Task Suite Metric 2,048 1,024 512 256 128
> MMEB-Text nDCG@5 46.78 46.69 46.15 45.30 43.05 MMEB-Image Hit@1 77.23 77.30 77.27 76.70 75.50 MMEB-Video Hit@1 64.43 64.26 64.25 63.92 63.17 MMEB-Audio Hit@1 48.02 48.04 48.16 48.04 47.69 MMEB-VisDoc nDCG@5 77.73 77.60 76.85 74.64 70.76 MMEB-Agent Hit@1 45.32 45.64 44.66 43.05 39.14
> Avg. 58.00 58.04 57.55 56.49 54.08
> Retention (%) 100.0 100.1 99.2 97.4 93.2 Naive truncation (Avg.) 58.00 57.61 56.28 54.42 49.78 Retention (%) 100.0 99.3 97.0 93.8 85.8

## A Additional Experimental Results 

Elastic Embedding Results. Table 7 (in Appendix) reports all six suites at the five nested widths, with the averages weighted by the number of tasks in each suite according to MMEB-v3 tasks. Halving the embedding to d = 1024 is free (100.1% retention), d = 512 and d = 256 cost 0.8% and 2.6% of it, and 

d = 128 — a sixteen-fold reduction — still retains 93.2%. The baseline throughout is naive truncation: the same frozen embedding cut to its first d coordinates and renormalized. Our margin over it grows monotonically as the prefix shortens, from +0.43 at d = 1024 to +4.30 at d = 128. At d = 1024 three suites sit marginally above full width, by at most 0.32; we read these as no measurable change rather than as gains, and as an indication that little is left to recover at that width — the useful range of the adaptation is the short prefixes. The average also hides a wide spread across suites (c.f. Fig. 6). At d = 128 audio loses 0.33 points and video 1.26, whereas VisDoc and Agent lose 6.97 and 6.18. Plain truncation costs those two the most as well, 13.89 and 11.01 points against 3.00 on audio, and they are also where the adaptation recovers the least of that loss: the gap is a property of the task rather than of the compressor. We attribute this to the limited information capacity of a low-dimensional vector. Audio and video queries here are largely settled by coarse category-level evidence, which survives in the leading directions, whereas VisDoc has to localize one passage or figure within a page whose global appearance it shares with many distractors, and Agent has to separate interface states that differ in a few small elements. Such fine-grained decisions rest on lower-variance directions, and those are precisely the directions a short prefix discards, in which case what these suites need is capacity, not a better projection. 

## B Example of Data 

Please refer to Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 for image data format and refer to Fig. 10-11 for video data synthesis. 26 128 256 512 1024 2048 

> Embedding dimension
> 40 42 44 46
> nDCG@5

MMEB-Text     

> 128 256 512 1024 2048
> Embedding dimension
> 72 73 74 75 76 77
> Hit@1

MMEB-Image     

> 128 256 512 1024 2048
> Embedding dimension
> 60 62 64
> Hit@1

MMEB-Video     

> 128 256 512 1024 2048
> Embedding dimension
> 45 46 47 48
> Hit@1

MMEB-Audio     

> 128 256 512 1024 2048
> Embedding dimension
> 65 70 75
> nDCG@5

MMEB-VisDoc     

> 128 256 512 1024 2048
> Embedding dimension
> 35.0 37.5 40.0 42.5 45.0
> Hit@1

MMEB-Agent    

> Naive truncation Hybrid PCA only Adapter only Hybrid PCA + adapter (ours)

Figure 7: Performance versus embedding width on all six MMEB-v3 suites. We compare naive truncation of the frozen encoder, the hybrid PCA basis alone, the residual adapter alone, and the two combined. Note that the vertical scale and the metric differ per panel (Hit@1 for image, video, audio and agent; nDCG@5 for text and VisDoc), so panels show trends rather than comparable magnitudes. Two patterns run across the panels. The PCA basis carries most of the gain at 512 and above while the adapter carries more of it at 128 (averaged over the six suites, 59.28 vs. 58.46 at 512, reversing to 55.49 vs. 56.12 at 128), and neither component alone reaches the combination at any width. The adapter alone is also the only configuration that can fall below plain truncation, which it does at 1024 on video, VisDoc and Agent; composing it with the basis removes that regression, consistent with the basis supplying the initialization the adapter is trained from. 27 IMAGE DATA TEMPLATE （T2I, I2T, IT2I ）

T2I_TEMPLATE = { 

"messages": [ 

{

"role": "system", 

"content": "Find me an everyday image that matches the given caption:" 

}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "A man riding a bicycle on a bridge."} 

], 

"positive_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

]

], 

"positive_images": [["path/to/positive_image.jpg"]], 

"negative_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

]

], 

"negative_images": [["path/to/negative_image.jpg"]] 

}

I2T_TEMPLATE = { 

"messages": [ 

{

"role": "system", 

"content": "Find an image caption describing the given everyday image." 

}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

], 

"images": ["path/to/query_image.jpg"], 

"positive_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "A cat sitting on a window sill."} 

]

], 

"negative_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "A dog running in the park."} 

]

]

}

I2I_WITH_TEXT_TEMPLATE = { 

"messages": [ 

{

"role": "system", 

"content": ( 

"Given an image, find a similar everyday image with the " 

"described changes:" 

)

}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>\nShow three bottles of soft drink."} 

], 

"images": ["path/to/query_image.jpg"], 

"positive_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

]

], 

"positive_images": [["path/to/positive_image.jpg"]], 

"negative_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

]

], 

"negative_images": [["path/to/negative_image.jpg"]] 

}Figure 8: Image data template for text-to-image, image-to-text and text-image-to-text. 28 IMAGE DATA TEMPLATE (I2I, I2IT) 

I2I_PURE_IMAGE_TEMPLATE = { 

"messages": [ 

{

"role": "system", 

"content": "Find a day-to-day image that looks similar to the provided image." 

}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

], 

"images": ["path/to/query_image.jpg"], 

"positive_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

]

], 

"positive_images": [["path/to/positive_image.jpg"]], 

"negative_messages": [ 

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>"} 

]

], 

"negative_images": [["path/to/negative_image.jpg"]] 

}

I2I_WITH_CAND_TEXT_TEMPLATE = {

"messages": [

{

"role": "system", 

"content": (

"Retrieve a Wikipedia image-description pair that provides evidence "

"for the question of this image:" 

)

}, 

{"role": "user", "content": "<image>\nWhat is the name of this place?"} 

], 

"images": ["path/to/query_image.jpg"], 

"positive_messages": [

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{

"role": "user", 

"content": "<image>\nTitisee. The Titisee is a lake in the southern Black Forest." 

}

]

], 

"positive_images": [["path/to/entity_image.jpg"]], 

"negative_messages": [

[

{"role": "system", "content": "Represent the user's input."}, 

{

"role": "user", 

"content": "<image>\nBodensee. Lake Constance is a lake on the Rhine." 

}

]

], 

"negative_images": [["path/to/wrong_entity_image.jpg"]] 

}Figure 9: Image data template for image-to-image, image-to-image-text. 29 Video Caption Refinement Prompt 

SYSTEM PROMPT 

You are a video caption refinement assistant. Given a video (represented as uniformly sampled frames) and 

an original text query, your task is to determine whether the query accurately describes the video 

content. If the query is already a good description, output it as-is. If the query is inaccurate (e.g., 

wrong number of people, wrong action, wrong object), rewrite it to better match what is actually shown in 

the video. 

Rules: 

- Keep the new query concise and natural (similar length to the original). 

- Only change what is factually wrong; preserve correct parts. 

- Do NOT add information that cannot be clearly seen in the video. 

- If the original query is already accurate, output it unchanged. 

- Imitate the original query's expression format. 

Output your answer in JSON format: 

{"reason": "<brief explanation of whether and why you changed the query>", "new_query": "<the refined or 

unchanged query>"} 

Only output the JSON, nothing else. 

USER PROMPT TEMPLATE 

These are {num_frames} frames uniformly sampled from a video. 

Original query: "{query}" 

Please check if this query accurately describes the video content. If not, rewrite it to better match the 

video. If it is already accurate, output the original query unchanged. 

Output as JSON: {"reason": "...", "new_query": "..."} Figure 10: Video query rewrite prompt Video-Text Relevance Filtering Prompt 

SYSTEM PROMPT 

You are a video-text relevance judge. Given a video (represented as uniformly 

sampled frames) and a text query, determine how relevant the video content is to 

the query. Output your answer in JSON format: 

{"reason": "<brief explanation of why the video is or is not relevant>", "score": 

<0, 1, or 2>} 

Scoring criteria: 

0 = Not relevant: the video content has no meaningful connection to the query. 

1 = Somewhat relevant: the video shares some visual or thematic overlap with the 

query, but does not fully match. 

2 = Highly relevant: the video clearly depicts or closely matches the content 

described in the query. 

Only output the JSON, nothing else. 

USER PROMPT TEMPLATE 

These are {num_frames} frames uniformly sampled from a video. 

Query: "{query}" 

Please judge how relevant this video is to the above query. 

Output your judgment as JSON: {"reason": "...", "score": 0 or 1 or 2} 

Figure 11: Video relevance filtering prompt 30