Title: SVHalluc: Benchmarking Speech-Vision Hallucination in Audio-Visual Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.02642v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 00:02:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# SVHalluc: Benchmarking Speech-Vision Hallucination in Audio-Visual Large Language Models 

## Chenshuang Zhang Kyeong Seon Kim Chengxin Liu Tae-Hyun Oh KAIST 

{zcs15, taehyun.oh }@kaist.ac.kr 

## Abstract 

Despite the success of audio-visual large-language mod-els (LLMs), they can produce plausible but ungrounded out-puts, termed hallucination. Existing benchmarks focus on environmental sounds (e.g., dog barking) to indicate event occurrence. In contrast, human speech carries fundamen-tally different, rich semantics and temporal structures, yet it remains unexplored whether current models can accu-rately align speech content with corresponding visual sig-nals. In this work, we show that speech content can in-duce hallucinations in audio-visual LLMs. To systemati-cally study this, we introduce SVHalluc, the first compre-hensive benchmark for evaluating speech–vision halluci-nation in audio-visual LLMs. Our benchmark diagnoses speech–vision hallucinations from two critical and comple-mentary aspects: semantic and temporal. Experimental re-sults demonstrate that state-of-the-art open-source audio-visual LLMs struggle with aligning speech content with corresponding visual signals, with a near-random accu-racy on multiple tasks. In contrast, Gemini 2.5 Pro sig-nificantly outperforms the open-source models. Our anal-ysis suggests that their failures stem from limited ability in cross-modality understanding, despite strong performance in single-modality perception. Our work uncovers a new and fundamental limitation of current audio-visual LLMs and highlights the need for speech-grounded video compre-hension. Project page: https://chenshuang-zhang. github.io/projects/svhalluc/. 

## 1. Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant advancement from text understanding [35, 38] to multi-modal reasoning [1, 2, 13, 22, 45]. Audio-visual LLMs [4, 36, 37] jointly process video and audio to handle real-world multimodal scenarios. Despite impressive abilities, recent studies [18, 26, 32] find that audio-visual LLMs can pro-duce plausible outputs but not grounded in the input, a fail-ure termed as hallucination [14, 46]. This raises significant safety concerns for the application of existing audio-visual LLMs and highlights the urgent need to evaluate how well • Human -speech sound environment             

> •Meaningful linguistic units
> •Dense, structured semantics
> •Temporal reach beyond the present
> •Ambient environment sound
> •Indicator for event occurrence
> •Focus on limited semantic events
> •Focus on current moment

🐶 Dog barking 

> Person: “Put the meat on the cheese!”

👩  

> Previous Benchmark Ours

Figure 1. Differences between our work and existing bench-marks. Existing benchmarks evaluate audio-visual hallucination mainly by environmental sounds (e.g., dog barking), using them as indicators of event occurrence. In contrast, our benchmark in-vestigates the speech-vision hallucination induced by the speech content. The rich semantic and temporal information conveyed in speech poses significant challenges to audio-visual understanding. Our work uncovers hallucination modes in audio-visual LLMs that previous benchmarks cannot capture. 

they integrate multimodal inputs and where they may fail. Existing audio-visual benchmarks [18, 26, 32] examine hallucination primarily through environmental sounds, such as dog barking or sirens. Specifically, they use environmen-tal sounds as indicators of event occurrence [18, 26, 32]. As a result, prior benchmarks reduce audio-visual under-standing to questions like “Is the dog making sound in the audio?” [32] or “What is the person doing when siren is heard?” [26]. Such simple question types [18, 26, 32] fo-cus on limited semantic events. Moreover, existing bench-marks [26] typically use environmental sounds to indicate the current moment, without referring to a different time (e.g., past or future). As such, the existing benchmarks [18, 26, 32] are only dedicated to such specific types of hal-lucination modes in audio-visual LLMs. In this work, we investigate speech-vision hallucination, a setting unexplored in existing benchmarks and funda-mentally different from environmental sounds. First, un-like previous benchmarks [18, 26, 32] that use environmen-tal sounds to indicate event occurrence, speech is beyond an event indicator since its content cannot be summarized as a simple “a person is speaking.” Second, speech con-

> arXiv:2606.02642v1 [eess.AS] 31 May 2026

veys rich information, such as instructions or even irrele-vant commentary. This introduces a complex semantic re-lationship between speech content and visual scene, yet is overlooked by existing benchmarks. Third, speech can de-scribe events that happen in the past, present or future, while previous benchmarks only use environmental sounds to in-dicate the moment when they occur [26]. These properties make speech-vision understanding significantly challeng-ing and introduce hallucination modes that previous bench-marks cannot capture. To systematically address these challenges, we introduce SVHalluc, the first comprehensive benchmark specifically designed to evaluate speech–vision hallucination in audio-visual LLMs. Specifically, SVHalluc evaluates whether audio-visual LLMs can accurately integrate speech and vi-sual information along two critical and complementary di-mensions: semantic and temporal. In semantic halluci-nation tasks, we aim to evaluate whether models can cor-rectly find the correspondence between speech content and the visual scene, avoiding hallucinating non-existing enti-ties (e.g., objects or events). In temporal hallucination tasks, we aim to evaluate whether models could identify when nar-rated events visually occur compared to the moment when speech is heard. We design three complementary coarse-to-fine tasks for each hallucination type. Our SVHalluc sys-tematically diagnoses failure modes of current audio-visual LLMs, providing a rigorous and comprehensive evaluation of speech-vision hallucinations. We evaluate the state-of-the-art audio-visual LLMs on our benchmark, including the open-source Qwen3-Omni [37] and commercial model Gemini 2.5 Pro [8]. Ex-perimental results show that all open-source models per-form poorly on SVHalluc, often approaching random guess-ing. This demonstrates that existing open-source models struggle to align speech content with the corresponding vi-sual evidence, an issue unexplored in prior studies and po-tentially harmful in real-world applications. The stronger performance of Gemini 2.5 Pro [8] also indicates a huge gap between open-source and commercial models. We fur-ther conduct a comprehensive analysis of why these models hallucinate on SVHalluc. Although current audio–visual LLMs perform well in single-modality tasks (e.g., speech recognition), they cannot reliably integrate useful informa-tion across modalities. Our findings reveal a fundamental limitation in audio–visual LLMs for now and highlight the need for more reliable speech–video understanding. 

## 2. SVHalluc: Cross-modal Speech-Vision Hal-lucination Evaluation Benchmark 

In this section, we first introduce the taxonomy of our SVHalluc benchmark in Section 2.1. We then present our investigation of speech-vision hallucinations from two crit-ical and complementary aspects: semantic hallucination in Section 2.2 and temporal hallucination in Section 2.3. Fi-nally, we introduce the dataset creation pipeline in Sec-tion 2.4 and dataset statistics in Section 2.5. 

2.1. Task Taxonomy 

Overview. Our work proposes SVHalluc, the first bench-mark that systematically evaluates speech–vision hallucina-tion in audio-visual LLMs. SVHalluc examines model abil-ities and reveals hallucination modes from two critical and complementary aspects as follows. (1) Semantic halluci-nation : what content in the speech semantically correspond to visual evidence; (2) Temporal hallucination : when the narrated events visually occur compared to moment when speech is heard. These two dimensions capture fundamen-tal properties of human speech, including rich semantic in-formation and temporal structures. For each dimension, we design three complementary diagnostic tasks that probe the model in a coarse-to-fine manner, uncovering hallucination modes unexplored in previous benchmarks [18, 26, 32]. 

Task formulation. Following prior benchmarks [18, 26, 32], we adopt a unified question-based formulation for all tasks. Given an input video paired with speech, we con-struct text-format questions and ask models to generate corresponding answers based on the video input. We de-sign multiple questions to probe different model behaviors. For consistent evaluation and statistical analysis, we follow prior hallucination benchmarks [18, 26, 32, 39] to present the questions in either two-choice or multiple-choice for-mats. We introduce how these questions are constructed in Section 2.2 and Section 2.3. We perform rigorous evalua-tion using multiple metrics, with details in Section 3.1. 

2.2. Speech-Vision Semantic Hallucination 

Motivation. Existing audio-visual hallucination bench-marks [18, 26, 32] primarily use environmental sounds (e.g., dog barking and sirens) to indicate the occurrence of a single event. In contrast, human speech carries rich and fundamental different semantics (e.g., objects or actions), yet remains unexplored. Importantly, speech does not al-ways describe the actual visual scene, including diverse in-formation such as events that are not visible or even totally unrelated to visual content. While humans can easily find the correspondence between speech content and relevant vi-sual evidence, it remains unexplored whether current audio-visual LLMs have this ability. To address this, we design a set of diagnostic tasks as follows. 

Task definition. Given a video paired with human speech, we evaluate whether audio-visual LLMs can correctly iden-tify the correspondence between speech content and visual scene. Specifically, a successful model should detect se-mantic inconsistencies between speech and visual signals, while avoiding hallucinations induced by mismatched or ir-relevant speech. turn the heat to medium low and place a slice of bread on the pan and top it   

> with cheddar cheese

So roll out that dough until it's about 3 quarters of a centimetre thick 

Speech -vision Semantic Hallucination 

Speech -vision Temporal Hallucination 

# …      

> Global Semantic Alignment (GSA)
> Q. Does the speech describe the visual events
> in the video?
> (A) Yes (B) No
> Fine -grained Semantic Alignment (FGSA)
> Q. Is the cheddar cheese visible in the video?
> (A) Yes (B) No
> Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CSMB)
> Q. Is the following event visible in the video:
> add heat to it?
> (A) Yes (B) No

# …       

> Temporal Alignment (TA)
> Q. When the speech is heard, is the narrated event
> happening at the same time in the video?
> (A) Yes (B) No
> Temporal Forecasting (TF)
> Q. Relative to the moment when the speech is heard,
> when does the narrated event occur in the video?
> (A) Past (B) Present (C) Future
> Cross -Modal Temporal Binding (CMTB)
> Q. When the speech is heard, what visual action is
> occurring in the video? (A) cut the dough in half
> (B) roll the dough out (C) grill the burgers

Figure 2. Cross-modal speech-vision hallucinations in audio-visual LLMs. Our work shows that speech content can induce hallu-cinations in existing audio-visual LLMs. To systematically study this, we propose SVHalluc, the first comprehensive benchmark that investigates speech-vision hallucinations in audio-visual LLMs. Specifically, we investigate from two critical and complementary aspects: semantic and temporal. For semantic hallucination tasks, we evaluate whether models can find the semantic correspondence between speech and the visual scene, rather than hallucinating non-existing entities. For temporal hallucinations, we investigate whether models could identify the temporal relationship between narrated events and visual actions. Our work uncovers hallucination modes in audio-visual LLMs unexplored in previous benchmarks. 

Task design. We design three complementary coarse-to-fine tasks as follows: 1. Global semantic alignment (GSA): This question eval-uates whether the model can identify if the entire speech semantically matches the visual scene: 

Does the speech describe the visual events in the video? (A) Yes (B) No 

A model succeeds in this task if it chooses “yes” for matched samples while “no” for mismatched ones. This question examines whether the model can detect the se-mantic misalignment between speech and vision, rather than assuming alignment. 2. Fine-grained semantic alignment (FGSA): This ques-tion examines whether specific objects mentioned in the speech are visually present in the video: 

Is the [object] visible in the video? (A) Yes (B) No 

For each sample, the correct answer is “yes” if the nar-rated object visually appears in the video, otherwise “no”. This task aims to evaluate whether the model can identify fine-grained misalignment among speech and video or hallucinate non-existent entities without grounding them in visual evidence. 3. Cross-modal semantic binding (CMSB): This question tests whether the model hallucinates an event by incor-rectly combining actions mentioned in the speech with objects visible in the video (or vice versa). 

Is the following event visible in the video: [event]? (A) Yes (B) No 

For these composed events, the correct answer is “no” since they never occur visually in the video. In this case, a “yes” response indicates that the model mistak-enly binds speech and visual content to hallucinate non-existent events. Overall, these three tasks provide a comprehensive eval-uation of the model’s ability to identify semantic misalign-ment between speech and visual scenes. 2.3. Speech-Vision Temporal Hallucination 

Motivation. Existing hallucination benchmark [26] uses environmental sounds to indicate the current moment, ask-ing questions like “What is the person doing when siren is heard?”. This design mainly examines the temporal ground-ing ability of audio-visual LLMs. In contrast, speech con-veys rich temporal structures. It may describe actions or events not happening in the current moment, but in the past or future. These properties introduce complex tempo-ral relationships between speech content and visual scenes, which is unexplored in prior studies. 

Task definition. Given a video paired with human speech, we evaluate whether audio–visual LLMs can correctly iden-tify when the narrated events visually occur compared to the moment when the speech is heard. Specifically, a success-ful model should distinguish whether the speech describes events that happen in the past , present , or future , instead of hallucinating events occurring in an incorrect time. 

Task Design. We design three complementary coarse-to-fine tasks as follows: 1. Temporal alignment (TA). This task aims to evaluate whether the models can identify whether the narrated events are visually happening at the same time when speech is heard: 

> When the speech is heard, is the described event happening at the same time in the video? (A) Yes (B) No

To correctly answer this question, the model needs to first understand the speech to capture narrated events, then identify the events visually happening in the video, and finally evaluate whether they align in time. 2. Temporal forecasting (TF). This question evaluates whether the model can identify the relative temporal po-sition of narrated events along the video timeline: 

> Relative to the moment when the speech is heard, when does the narrated event occur in the video? (A) Past (B) Present (C) Future

This task evaluates the ability of models not only in cross-modality reasoning, but also in fine-grained rea-soning over time. 3. Cross-modal temporal binding (CMTB). This question evaluates whether the model can still be grounded in vi-sual evidence while the speech describes an event hap-pening at a different time. 

> When the speech is heard, what visual action is oc-curring in the video? (A) [Speech-mentioned event that happens in a different time] (B) [Visual event that is happening when the person is speaking] (C) [A distracting event from other videos]

To correctly answer this question, the models need to identify the actions actually happening visually and avoid hallucinating the narrated events into the wrong temporal position. Overall, these three tasks evaluate the temporal under-standing abilities of audio-visual LLMs across modalities. 

2.4. Dataset Construction 

To systematically study speech-vision hallucinations in audio-visual LLMs, we propose an automated dataset con-struction pipeline with human verification. Specifically, our pipeline transforms well-aligned speech-video pairs ( A, V )into controlled variations that correspond to semantic or temporal conditions. For clarity, for two-choice questions, we term samples with ground-truth labels “yes” as positive samples, while those labeled “no” as negative samples. 

Video collection and preprocessing. We collect syn-chronized speech-video pairs from the widely-applied YouCook2 dataset [42], where the narrations well align with visual actions. We follow prior work [16, 30, 43] to adopt the validation set from YouCook2 for evaluation. Based on the annotations from YouCook2 [42], we clip each video into procedure segments. We then use an automatic speech recognition (ASR) model, the widely-used Whisper model [28], to obtain the speech transcript for each video. 

Data construction for semantic hallucination tasks. We introduce how to obtain samples for each task as follows. 1. Global semantic alignment (GSA): Positive samples for GSA task are those where speech content cor-rectly describes visual scenes. Therefore, we use the original well-aligned speech-video pair ( Ai, Vi) from YouCook2 [42] dataset as positive samples, where i indi-cates the index for the original video clip. To create neg-ative samples that require speech-video misalignment, we randomly sample another video j and pair its audio 

Aj with the current video Vi, forming a disturbed pair (Aj , Vi) that breaks speech-vision correspondence. Note that both the aligned speech-video pairs ( Ai, Vi) and the disturbed ones ( Aj , Vi) all serve as video candidates for other semantic hallucination tasks. 2. Fine-grained semantic alignment (FGSA): We prompt GPT model [25] to find the visible and invisible objects in the video based on detailed video and audio annota-tions from YouCook2 [42] dataset. We then fill the ques-tion template with visible objects to create positive sam-ples, and with narrated but invisible objects as negative samples. 3. Cross-modal semantic binding (CMSB): We use GPT to extract the visible action–object pairs based on video annotations as positive event pairs. To create negative samples, we first use GPT to extract speech-only ac-tions, i.e., actions that are mentioned in speech but in-visible in videos. Similarly, we extract speech-only ob-jects, vision-only actions, and vision-only objects. We then create cross-modal action-object combinations as Category Task Abbrev. Count                  

> Semantic Global Semantic Alignment GSA 444 Fine-Grained Semantic Alignment FGSA 444 Cross-Modal Semantic Binding CMSB 534
> Semantic Hallucination Total 1422
> Temporal Temporal Alignment TA 368 Temporal Forecasting TF 276 Cross-Modal Temporal Binding CMTB 339
> Temporal Hallucination Total 983 Overall Total 2405
> Table 1. Task taxonomy. We summarize the tasks in SVHalluc as well as their abbreviations. Our benchmark includes 2405 video-question pairs on 6 different speech-vision hallucination tasks.

follows: (speech-only action, vision-only object) and (vision-only action, speech-only object). Note that these combinations do not occur visually in the video. To en-sure data quality, we further use GPT to filter out unre-alistic combinations and keep only reasonable events as negative samples. 

Data construction for temporal hallucination tasks. We construct video samples based on annotations about the start and end time of events from YouCook2 [42] dataset. For each video, we identify the time around the moment when speech is heard as tspeak . We then define the time when narrated events visually occur as tvisual . Given a speech-video pair, if tspeak is close to tvisual , we define it as temporally aligned, i.e., when the person is speaking, the narrated events are visually happening in the present mo-ment. In the case that tspeak and tvisual are far from each other, we define them as temporally-misaligned. Specifi-cally, if tvisual is much smaller than tspeak , we define that the narrated events happen in the past moment, and future 

moment if tvisual is much larger than tspeak . For cross-modal temporal binding task, we adopt event annotations from YouCook2 [42] as option candidates. 

Quality control. To ensure dataset quality, we first use GPT model to filter out unqualified samples, such as videos where speech is too short or does not clearly describe vi-sual scenes. We then perform human-in-the-loop for final verification, ensuring all the samples are clear. 

2.5. Dataset Statistics 

Our SVHalluc benchmark contains 2405 video-question pairs, including 1422 samples for semantic hallucination tasks and 983 pairs for temporal hallucination. We show the sample distribution for each task in Table 1. For each task, we ensure a balanced number of samples for each op-tion to ensure fair evaluation. We also show the distribution of action and objects in Figure 3.  

> Figure 3. Distributions of actions and objects from SVHalluc.

## 3. Experiments 

In this section, we first introduce our experiment setups in Section 3.1, then report the results of state-of-the-art audio-visual LLMs in Section 3.2. We further analyze the un-derlying reasons for model failures and provide insights for model improvement in Section 3.3. 

3.1. Experiment Setup 

Models. We evaluate our SVHalluc benchmark on six state-of-the-art audio-visual LLMs, including both open-source and commercial ones. These models have achieved re-markable success and are widely used for omni-modal un-derstanding tasks. For open-source models, we evaluate the latest Qwen3-Omni [37], Qwen2.5-Omni [36], video-SALMONN 2 [33], and VideoLLaMA 2 [4]. For commer-cial models, we evaluate the latest Gemini 2.5 Pro. For dif-ferent tasks, we prompt the model with different questions as discussed in Section 2. We evaluate all models in a zero-shot manner, without additional model training. 

Evaluation metrics. We follow previous audio-visual benchmarks [6, 26, 32] to design our tasks in a two-choice or multiple-choice manner. For evaluation, we use standard metrics widely used in existing studies [6, 26, 32]. For two-choice tasks, we report accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. Specifically, accuracy is defined as the ratio of cor-rectly predicted samples over all samples. Precision is the ratio of true positives to all predicted positives, while recall is the ratio of true positives to all true positives. To evaluate the case when precision and recall diverge, we use F1 score, which is defined as the harmonic mean of precision and re-call. We take samples with the ”yes” option as positive ones when computing the precision, recall, and F1 metrics. We report accuracy over all samples for multiple-choice tasks. 

3.2. Results 

We evaluate SVHalluc on six state-of-the-art audio-visual LLMs, including the recent open-source model Qwen3-Omni [37] and Gemini 2.5 Pro. We report the results for semantic hallucination and temporal hallucination tasks in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Note that our dataset is option-balanced, and we report the result of random choices in each task for reference. 

Semantic hallucination. Semantic hallucination tasks evaluate whether the model can identify what speech con-tent is supported by visual evidence. As shown in Table 2, all open-source models show severe failure modes in our benchmark. For the global semantic alignment (GSA) task, most models achieve an accuracy of around 50%, close to random guess results. This indicates that models tend to believe that the speech describes visual scenes, without re-ally reasoning about their alignment. Therefore, even in the cases that speech and video describe two distinctly different scenes, e.g., boiling noodles and frying meat patties, mod-els still choose the positive alignment answer, leading to a high recall but low precision. Our GSA task reveals a high alignment bias in existing models from the global seman-tics perspective. Notably, Gemini 2.5 Pro achieves a high accuracy of 93.10%, demonstrating a huge gap, and also highlights that our dataset is solvable. In the fine-grained semantic alignment (FGSA) task, video-SALMONN [31] achieves a poor accuracy, while Qwen2.5-Omni [36] and Qwen3-Omni [38] show a significant improvement, compa-rable to Gemini 2.5 Pro. These results show that Qwen2.5-Omni [36] and Qwen3-Omni [38] have impressive fine-grained cross-modal grounding ability compared to other models. For the cross-modal semantic binding (CMSB) 

task, all models perform worse than the FGSA task, high-lighting the challenge to the models. Note that for the CMSB task, the models not only need to identify whether the object is visible, but also need to recognize the absence of actions. This task also evaluates the model’s ability in whether they can bind the action with its corresponding ob-jects and vice versa. 

Temporal hallucination. Temporal hallucination tasks evaluate whether the models can determine if the narrated events visually occur at the same time when the speech is heard, or at a different time (e.g., past or future). As shown in Table 3, all open-source models perform poorly at tem-poral alignment (TA) and temporal forecasting (TF) tasks, with an accuracy around the random choices. These re-sults demonstrate that existing open-source models fail to find the correct temporal correspondence between speech content and visual events, a critical ability for audio-visual LLMs but remains unexplored in previous studies. Interest-ingly, Qwen3-Omni [37] achieves significant improvement on the cross-modal temporal binding (CMTB) task com-pared to prior open-source models, where speech acts as a distractor for visual recognition since it describes events at a different time. In contrast, Gemini-2.5 Pro significantly outperforms all open-source models in all temporal tasks. These results demonstrate that our SVHalluc benchmark ef-fectively uncovers a new and important set of temporal un-derstanding failures in the open-source audio-visual LLMs, and suggests a direction for future improvement. 

3.3. Analysis 

Section 3.2 demonstrates that our work uncovers new and critical failure modes of advanced audio-visual LLMs when understanding video-speech pairs. In this section, we pro-vide a comprehensive analysis of why current models hallu-cinate on SVHalluc. Our analysis provides an in-depth un-derstanding of how each component in audio-visual LLMs works, and offers insights for future model improvement. 

Do models recognize what people are saying in the au-dio? To analyze whether speech recognition ability is the reason for the model failures in SVHalluc, we evaluate Qwen3-Omni [37], the state-of-the-art model, on the au-tomatic speech recognition (ASR) task. Specifically, given each video in SVHalluc, we prompt the models with the fol-lowing question: What does the person say in the audio? .We record the model outputs as predicted speech content of Qwen3-Omni. For quantitative evaluation, we use a widely-applied Whisper model [28] to generate the pseudo ground-truth labels. Experimental results show that Qwen3-Omni achieves a low word error rate (WER) of 0.0915 and a high word information preserved (WIP) of 0.8863. These results demonstrate that Qwen3-Omni [37] could recognize most of the speech contents in SVHalluc, indicating that speech recognition ability is not the key bottleneck for the poor per-formance of audio-visual LLMs on SVHalluc. 

Can language cues mitigate speech-vision hallucina-tions? Existing audio-visual LLMs typically encode the visual and audio inputs to the text token space of LLMs, using LLMs to perform multimodal reasoning. However, this design may not align non-text modalities and text well, leading to suboptimal understanding of multimodal infor-mation. To evaluate whether poor results in SVHalluc come from the suboptimal representation of audio tokens, we ex-plicitly use the speech transcript as additional text input to the model. Specifically, we use Whisper model [28] to transcribe the speech, and concatenate them with the orig-inal text prompt (e.g., questions) as inputs. Table 4 shows that adding speech transcripts improves the model’s perfor-mance on FGSA and CMSB, indicating that speech content in the text format helps the model have a better understand-ing. For the CMTB task, speech acts as distractors by de-scribing events that happen at a different time. This aligns well with the results that adding speech transcripts leads to more severe hallucination on CMTB, indicated by a per-formance drop. Notably, using speech transcripts achieves comparable results in GSA, TA, and TF tasks, indicating that those tasks provide more complex challenges to audio-visual LLMs beyond speech recognition. 

Can models recognize the time when the speech is heard? Temporal hallucination tasks evaluate whether Table 2. Results for semantic hallucination tasks. We evaluate state-of-the-art audio-visual LLMs on SVHalluc, including both open-source model (e.g.,Qwen3-Omni [37]) and commercial models (e.g.,Gemini 2.5 Pro [8]). Results across three semantic hallucination tasks show that open-source models perform poorly in SVHalluc, e.g., most models achieve an accuracy near random choice on GSA task. In contrast, Gemini 2.5 Pro achieves a strong performance, highlighting the gap between open-source and commercial models in speech-vision understanding.                                                                                                   

> Semantic Hallucination Model Global semantic alignment (GSA) Fine-grained semantic alignment (FGSA) Cross-modal semantic binding (CMSB)
> Acc. ( ↑)Prec. ( ↑)Recall ( ↑)F1( ↑)Acc. ( ↑)Prec. ( ↑)Recall ( ↑)F1( ↑)Acc. ( ↑)Prec. ( ↑)Recall ( ↑)F1( ↑)Gemini 2.5 Pro [8] 93.10 90.24 96.64 93.33 86.06 80.22 95.79 87.32 78.56 74.58 92.98 82.77 video-SALMONN [31] 52.05 51.06 99.25 67.43 49.84 49.92 96.12 65.71 61.10 56.63 94.88 70.92 video-SALMONN 2 [33] 53.92 62.35 19.78 30.03 79.58 79.42 79.94 79.68 72.77 65.71 95.26 77.77 VideoLLaMA 2 [4] 50.00 50.00 100.00 66.67 67.57 58.44 94.74 72.29 73.03 68.22 96.69 80.00 Qwen2.5-Omni [36] 77.70 73.75 86.04 79.42 81.08 77.60 87.39 82.20 72.28 64.48 99.25 78.17 Qwen3-Omni [37] 55.10 52.86 100.00 69.16 79.50 72.00 97.30 82.76 74.34 66.17 99.63 79.52 Random Choice 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00

Table 3. Results for temporal hallucination tasks. We report the results of state-of-the-art models on temporal hallucination tasks in SVHalluc. All open-source models achieve a near-random per-formance, while Gemini 2.5 Pro [8] significantly outperforms oth-ers. These results highlight the need for open-source model im-provement in speech-vision understanding.                                                   

> Temporal Hallucination Model TA TF CMTB
> Acc. ( ↑)Prec. ( ↑)Recall ( ↑)F1( ↑)Acc. ( ↑)Acc. ( ↑)Gemini 2.5 Pro [8] 85.17 82.67 89.00 85.71 53.89 69.25 video-SALMONN [31] 50.00 50.00 87.08 63.53 32.81 37.39 video-SALMONN 2 [33] 50.00 50.00 100.00 66.67 33.33 48.58 VideoLLaMA 2 [4] 50.00 50.00 100.00 66.67 32.25 45.72 Qwen2.5-Omni [36] 50.27 50.28 49.46 49.86 31.52 53.10 Qwen3-Omni [37] 51.11 50.84 100.00 67.41 30.60 61.75 Random Choice 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 33.33 33.33

models can identify the temporal correspondence between narrated events and visual scenes. To understand the model’s ability in recognizing time, we explicitly ask the model to output the start and end times when the speech is heard. Specifically, we prompt the models with the fol-lowing question: “When is the speech heard in the audio? Provide the start and end timestamps (in seconds).” We evaluate Qwen3-Omni [37] on our SVHalluc and compare the outputs with predictions of Silero-VAD [34], a strong and widely used voice activity detection model. For quan-titative evaluation, we use predictions of Silero-VAD as pseudo-labels and compute the mIoU between Silero-VAD and Qwen3-Omni, obtaining a mIoU of 0.8844. This indi-cates that Qwen3-Omni has a strong temporal localization ability of speech segments even in our challenging video scenarios. Therefore, the ability to identify when speech is heard is not the main factor that leads to the poor perfor-mance on our SVHalluc. Our analysis also demonstrates that SVHalluc evaluates a broader ability beyond speech temporal localization. 

Do models correctly use both video and speech modality for comprehension? Our SVHalluc evaluates the cross-modality understanding ability of existing audio-visual LLMs. To examine whether models can correctly use video and speech and how much they rely on each modality in different tasks, we evaluate Qwen3-Omni [37] by removing one modality at the input level. Table 4 shows that when taking speech-only inputs, accuracy on FGSA, CMSB, and CMTB drops significantly, indicating effective use of the visual content. In contrast, using video-only inputs even improves FGSA and CMSB since speech acts as a distrac-tor in these tasks. The performance on CMTB drops since it requires speech for temporal grounding. Removing either modality has a limited impact on GSA, TA, and TF tasks, revealing a limitation of current audio-visual LLMs in iden-tifying the alignment between speech and video. 

Summary. In this section, we analyze the reason for the poor performance of current audio-visual LLMs in our SVHalluc. Our study shows that current models perform well in single-modality tasks, such as speech recognition. However, they struggle to fully integrate information from both video and speech for multimodal reasoning. Our find-ings highlight that SVHalluc provides significant challenges for current models and the urgent need for speech-grounded video understanding. 

## 4. Related Work 

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Re-cently, LLMs have been extended to support inputs from multiple modalities [2, 19, 22], and are widely used in multiple applications, such as multimodal embedding [17], image retouching [40], and automatic model discov-ery [15]. As a milestone work for language-image model-ing, LLaVa [23] connects CLIP [27] vision encoder with language decoder Vicuna [5]. Specifically, LLaVa [23] projects vision representations to the embedding space of language tokens. The language encoder then performs Table 4. Results for analysis experiments. To analyze the reason why open-source models fail in SVHalluc, we perform experiments of Qwen-3-Omni [38] in different experiment conditions and report the accuracy. Our results show that adding speech transcripts can improve accuracy in several tasks (e.g., FGSA). We also present how different modality inputs influence the accuracy in different tasks.                                                  

> Model Semantic Hallucination Temporal Hallucination
> GSA ( ↑)FGSA ( ↑)CMSB ( ↑)Average ( ↑)TA ( ↑)TF ( ↑)CMTB ( ↑)Average ( ↑)Original Qwen3-Omni [38] 55.10 79.50 74.34 69.64 51.11 30.60 61.75 47.82 With speech transcript 53.29 83.14 76.40 70.94 50.56 33.21 49.70 44.49 Video-only input 49.77 84.91 87.08 73.92 50.27 33.21 47.18 43.55 Audio-only input 50.45 49.32 80.34 60.03 50.42 24.54 50.45 41.80 Random Choice 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 33.33 33.33 38.88

multimodal reasoning based on both vision and language tokens. This framework has been widely-applied in the advancement of MLLMs [19, 20, 24], such as Video-LLaVA [22] for video understanding. On the other hand, audios convey rich information and plays a critical role for humans when understanding the world. Recent MLLMs have extended to include audio signals for omnimodal per-ception and reasoning [4, 33, 36, 37], such as OneLLM [9], Video-LLaMa [41], and Video-LLaMA2 [4]. Specifically, Qwen2.5-Omni [36] and Qwen3-Omni [37] achieve great attention due to their impressive performance on down-stream tasks [10, 29]. In this work, we focus on audio-visual LLMs, which incorporate text, video, and audio inputs for a unified understanding. 

Evaluating Multimodal Large Language Models. Prior studies have specifically designed multiple benchmarks to evaluate the ability of multimodal LLMs [3, 6, 7, 10]. LENS [12] is designed to first instruct vision-language models then check its readiness. AV-Odyssey Bench [7] finds that audio-visual LLMs often fail in simple tasks that humans can easily identify, such as determining which of two sounds is louder. AVTRUSTBENCH [6] focuses on model robustness, including tasks like adversarial at-tack and compositional reasoning. Specifically, it evaluates whether the model could identify the case where there are no correct options. WorldSense [10] examines the omni-modal understanding ability by designing questions based on both video and audio. Video-Holmes [3] includes videos from suspense short films to test the reasoning ability of models. Another work SMILE [13] investigates the reason why people laugh in videos, while proposing a strong base-line leveraging the reasoning ability of text-only LLMs. In contrast, our work systematically investigates the hallucina-tion problem of audio-visual LLMs, specifically the speech-video hallucination. 

Hallucinations in MLLMs. Hallucination is a key chal-lenge to MLLMs, where the models produce plausible re-sponses but are not grounded in the input signals [44, 46]. Early studies focus on vision-language hallucination [11, 21, 46], introducing benchmarks to evaluate whether mod-els can correctly identify the visual presence of objects, such as BEAF [39], POPE [21], and CIEM [11]. Recently, a branch of studies [18, 32] reveals that audio-visual LLMs also hallucinate given the multimodal video-audio inputs. For example, AVHBench [32] finds that audio-visual LLMs often assume a visible object is making sound without refer-ring to the audio evidence, while another work [18] investi-gates how spurious inter-modality correlations influence the hallucination behaviors. Despite these investigations, exist-ing audio-visual hallucination benchmarks typically inves-tigate the environmental sound (e.g., dog barking or sirens) and use them to indicate the occurrence of events. In con-trast, speech conveys fundamentally different and rich in-formation, yet it is unexplored audio-visual LLMs could correctly align speech content with visual evidence. Our work fills this gap and provides a systematic investigation of speech-vision hallucination in audio-visual LLMs. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this work, we study speech-vision hallucinations in audio-visual LLMs, which is unexplored in prior work. To systematically address this, we propose SVHalluc, a com-prehensive benchmark that investigates speech-vision hallu-cination from two critical and complementary aspects: se-mantic and temporal. Specifically, we design three coarse-to-fine tasks for each aspect, resulting in six tasks in total. Experimental results show that state-of-the-art open-source models perform poorly on our SVHalluc, achieving near-random accuracy on multiple tasks. Gemini-2.5 Pro signif-icantly outperforms the open-source models, highlighting a huge gap between open-source and commercial models. We further analyze the reason for the failure of open-source models. Our analysis suggests that current models show good ability in single-modality tasks, such as speech recog-nition and temporal localization. However, these models fail in leveraging and integrating information across multi-ple modalities. Our work uncovers a critical limitation of existing audio-visual LLMs and highlight the need for reli-able speech-video understanding. Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by the InnoCORE program of the Ministry of Science and ICT (N10250156, KAIST In-noCore LLM) (23.3%); the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. RS-2024-00451947) (30%); and the Institute of Infor-mation & communications Technology Planning & Evalua-tion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. RS-2024-00457882 (23.3%), National AI Research Lab Project; No. 2022-0-00124; No. 2022-0-00124, No. RS-2022-II220124 (23.3%), Development of Artificial Intelligence Technology for Self-Improving Competency-Aware Learning). 

## References 

[1] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Men-sch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Se-bastian Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sa-hand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS , 2022. 1 [2] Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Ping Luo, Tong Lu, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng Dai. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In CVPR , pages 24185–24198, 2024. 1, 7 [3] Junhao Cheng, Yuying Ge, Teng Wang, Yixiao Ge, Jing Liao, and Ying Shan. Video-holmes: Can mllm think like holmes for complex video reasoning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21374 , 2025. 8 [4] Zesen Cheng, Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Yifei Xin, Xin Li, Guanzheng Chen, Yongxin Zhu, Wenqi Zhang, Ziyang Luo, Deli Zhao, and Lidong Bing. Videollama 2: Advancing spatial-temporal modeling and audio understanding in video-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07476 , 2024. 1, 5, 7, 8, 2, 3[5] Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhang-hao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yong-hao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, 2023. 7 [6] Sanjoy Chowdhury, Sayan Nag, Subhrajyoti Dasgupta, Yaot-ing Wang, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Ruohan Gao, and Dinesh Manocha. Avtrustbench: Assessing and enhancing reliability and robustness in audio-visual llms. In ICCV , pages 1590– 1601, 2025. 5, 8 [7] Kaixiong Gong, Kaituo Feng, Bohao Li, Yibing Wang, Mo-fan Cheng, Shijia Yang, Jiaming Han, Benyou Wang, Yutong Bai, Zhuoran Yang, and Xiangyu Yue. Av-odyssey bench: Can your multimodal llms really understand audio-visual in-formation? arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02611 , 2024. 8 [8] Google. Gemini 2.5 pro. https://docs.cloud. google.com/vertex-ai/generative-ai/docs/ models/gemini/2-5-pro , 2025. 2, 7 [9] Jiaming Han, Kaixiong Gong, Yiyuan Zhang, Jiaqi Wang, Kaipeng Zhang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Xi-angyu Yue. Onellm: One framework to align all modalities with language. In CVPR , pages 26584–26595, 2024. 8 [10] Jack Hong, Shilin Yan, Jiayin Cai, Xiaolong Jiang, Yao Hu, and Weidi Xie. Worldsense: Evaluating real-world omni-modal understanding for multimodal LLMs. In ICLR , 2026. 8[11] Hongyu Hu, Jiyuan Zhang, Minyi Zhao, and Zhenbang Sun. Ciem: Contrastive instruction evaluation method for better instruction tuning. arXiv:2309.02301 , 2023. 8 [12] Nam Hyeon-Woo, Moon Ye-Bin, Wonseok Choi, Lee Hyun, and Tae-Hyun Oh. VLM’s eye examination: Instruct and in-spect visual competency of vision language models. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. 8 [13] Lee Hyun, Kim Sung-Bin, Seungju Han, Youngjae Yu, and Tae-Hyun Oh. SMILE: Multimodal dataset for understand-ing laughter in video with language models. In NAACL Find-ings , pages 1149–1167, 2024. 1, 8 [14] Chaeyoung Jung, Youngjoon Jang, and Joon Son Chung. AVCD: Mitigating hallucinations in audio-visual large lan-guage models through contrastive decoding. In NeurIPS ,2025. 1 [15] Lee Jung-Mok, Nam Hyeon-Woo, Moon Ye-Bin, Junhyun Nam, and Tae-Hyun Oh. Automated model discovery via multi-modal & multi-step pipeline. In NeurIPS , 2025. 7 [16] Dahun Kim, AJ Piergiovanni, Ganesh Mallya, and Anelia Angelova. Videocomp: Advancing fine-grained composi-tional and temporal alignment in video-text models. In 

CVPR , pages 29060–29070, 2025. 4 [17] Kyeong Seon Kim, Baek Seong-Eun, Lee Jung-Mok, and Tae-Hyun Oh. mEOL: Training-free instruction-guided mul-timodal embedder for vector graphics and image retrieval. In 

WACV , pages 1191–1200, 2026. 7 [18] Sicong Leng, Yun Xing, Zesen Cheng, Yang Zhou, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, Deli Zhao, Shijian Lu, Chunyan Miao, and Lidong Bing. The curse of multi-modalities: Evaluating hal-lucinations of large multimodal models across language, vi-sual, and audio. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track ,2025. 1, 2, 8 [19] Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan Zhang, Yanwei Li, Zi-wei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. LLaVA-onevision: Easy visual task transfer. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2025. 7, 8 [20] Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama, Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Naumann, Hoifung Poon, and Jianfeng Gao. LLaVA-med: Training a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023. 8 [21] Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating object hallucination in large vision-language models. In EMNLP , pages 292–305, 2023. 8[22] Bin Lin, Yang Ye, Bin Zhu, Jiaxi Cui, Munan Ning, Peng Jin, and Li Yuan. Video-LLaVA: Learning united visual repre-sentation by alignment before projection. In EMNLP , pages 5971–5984, 2024. 1, 7, 8 [23] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In NeurIPS , 2023. 7 [24] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning. In CVPR ,pages 26296–26306, 2024. 8 [25] openAI. Introducing gpt-5. https://openai.com/ index/introducing-gpt-5/ , 2025. 4, 1 [26] Gorjan Radevski, Teodora Popordanoska, Matthew B. Blaschko, and Tinne Tuytelaars. DAVE: Diagnostic bench-mark for audio visual evaluation. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2025. 1, 2, 4, 5 [27] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML , pages 8748–8763, 2021. 7 [28] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine Mcleavey, and Ilya Sutskever. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In ICML ,pages 28492–28518, 2023. 4, 6 [29] S Sakshi, Utkarsh Tyagi, Sonal Kumar, Ashish Seth, Ra-maneswaran Selvakumar, Oriol Nieto, Ramani Duraiswami, Sreyan Ghosh, and Dinesh Manocha. MMAU: A massive multi-task audio understanding and reasoning benchmark. In 

ICLR , 2025. 8 [30] Madeline Chantry Schiappa, Shruti Vyas, Hamid Palangi, Yogesh S Rawat, and Vibhav Vineet. Robustness analysis of video-language models against visual and language pertur-bations. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2022. 4[31] Guangzhi Sun, Wenyi Yu, Changli Tang, Xianzhao Chen, Tian Tan, Wei Li, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, Yuxuan Wang, and Chao Zhang. video-SALMONN: Speech-enhanced audio-visual large language models. In ICML , pages 47198–47217, 2024. 6, 7 [32] Kim Sung-Bin, Oh Hyun-Bin, JungMok Lee, Arda Senocak, Joon Son Chung, and Tae-Hyun Oh. AVHBench: A cross-modal hallucination benchmark for audio-visual large lan-guage models. In ICLR , 2025. 1, 2, 5, 8 [33] Changli Tang, Yixuan Li, Yudong Yang, Jimin Zhuang, Guangzhi Sun, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and Chao Zhang. video-salmonn 2: Caption-enhanced audio-visual large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15220 , 2025. 5, 7, 8 [34] Silero Team. Silero vad: pre-trained enterprise-grade voice activity detector (vad), number detector and language clas-sifier. https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad , 2024. 7 [35] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth´ ee Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi` ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aure-lien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guil-laume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. 1 [36] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Yunfei Chu, and Jun-yang Lin. Qwen2.5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20215 , 2025. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 2, 3 [37] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, Yuanjun Lv, Yongqi Wang, Dake Guo, He Wang, Linhan Ma, Pei Zhang, Xinyu Zhang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, Baosong Yang, Bin Zhang, Ziyang Ma, Xipin Wei, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Peng Wang, Mingkun Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Xingzhang Ren, Bo Zheng, Rui Men, Fan Zhou, Bowen Yu, Jianxin Yang, Le Yu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen3-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17765 , 2025. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 3 [38] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chen-gen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. 1, 6, 8 [39] Moon Ye-Bin, Nam Hyeon-Woo, Wonseok Choi, and Tae-Hyun Oh. BEAF: Observing before-after changes to evaluate hallucination in vision-language models. In ECCV , pages 232–248, 2024. 2, 8 [40] Moon Ye-Bin, Roy Miles, Tae-Hyun Oh, Ismail Elezi, and Jiankang Deng. RetouchLLM: Training-free code-based im-age retouching with vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2510.08054 , 2025. 7 [41] Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-LLaMA: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language model for video un-derstanding. In EMNLP System Demonstrations , pages 543– 553, 2023. 8 [42] Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason J. Corso. To-wards automatic learning of procedures from web instruc-tional videos. In AAAI , 2018. 4, 5 [43] Xingyi Zhou, Anurag Arnab, Shyamal Buch, Shen Yan, Austin Myers, Xuehan Xiong, Arsha Nagrani, and Cordelia Schmid. Streaming dense video captioning. In CVPR , pages 18243–18252, 2024. 4 [44] Chenyu Zhu, YEFENG LIU, Hao Zhang, Aowen Wang, Yangxue, Guanhua Chen, Longyue Wang, Weihua Luo, and Kaifu Zhang. Alleviating hallucinations in large language models through multi-model contrastive decoding and dy-namic hallucination detection. In NeurIPS , 2025. 8 [45] Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mo-hamed Elhoseiny. MiniGPT-4: Enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. In 

ICLR , 2024. 1 [46] Xin Zou, Yizhou Wang, Yibo Yan, Yuanhuiyi Lyu, Ken-ing Zheng, Sirui Huang, Junkai Chen, Peijie Jiang, Jia Liu, Chang Tang, and Xuming Hu. Look twice before you an-swer: Memory-space visual retracing for hallucination miti-gation in multimodal large language models. In ICML , 2025. 1, 8 SVHalluc: Benchmarking Speech-Vision Hallucination in Audio-Visual Large Language Models 

# Supplementary Material 

## A. Additional Qualitative Results 

In this section, we visualize video–question pairs from SVHalluc, together with predictions from the latest au-dio–visual large language models (LLMs). Our SVHal-luc shows diversity in both task design and video scenar-ios, providing a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating speech-vision hallucination in audio-visual LLMs. • Speaker variability . SVHalluc includes videos where multiple people appear visually in the scene (Figure 4(a)) or only present in the audio (Figure 4(b)). • Illumination variability . Our dataset includes videos under diverse lighting conditions, such as bright environ-ments (Figure 5(a)) or dusky settings (Figure 5(b)). • Camera viewpoint diversity . SVHalluc includes videos with different viewpoints, such as fixed top-down views (Figure 6(a)), moving side-view (Figure 6(b)), and tran-sitions between object-centric and human-centric views (Figure 6(c)). 

## B. GPT Prompts for Dataset Creation 

During dataset creation, we adopt GPT [25] models to ex-tract the objects and actions for task formulation. To find objects and actions that uniquely appear in video or speech, we prompt the following instruction based on the caption of the video and speech. We find that GPT could return good results in most cases, and we perform a human verification based on GPT results. Given caption1 and caption2, extract action and ob-jects. Action refers to verbs, e.g., put in the bowl. First, extract all actions and objects from each cap-tion. Second, find unique actions and objects that only appear in one caption but not the other, termed as cap 1 only act , cap 1 only obj , cap 2 only act ,

cap 2 only obj , respectively. Following is one example. Output in the json format. Input: caption1: put the eggs in the bowl caption2: cut the eggs and cucumber Output: 

{ cap 1 only act : [”put in the bowl”], 

cap 1 only obj : [], 

cap 2 only act : [”cut”], 

cap only obj : [”cucumber”], 

}

## C. Dataset Quality Control 

To ensure the dataset quality, we design diverse strategies to filter out unqualified samples, including rule-based strategy and GPT-based strategy. For example, we filter out short videos and speeches to avoid the case that the events are not clearly shown. We also filter out samples if the speech only includes general information, e.g., “this looks great”, instead of describing the events. After dataset creation, we perform a final human verification to ensure the dataset quality. The high performance of Gemini-2.5 Pro also indi-cates the high quality of our dataset, while highlighting the severe hallucinations of open-source models. I'm going to turn the heat back to medium -low and place the 

first slice of bread in. Now what I'm going to do is lay the 

cheddar cheese over the top. 

(a) Multiple -speaker in Vision 

# …

# …

Global Semantic Alignment (GSA) 

Q. Does the speech describe the visual events in the 

video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Fine -Grained Semantic Alignment (FGSA) 

Q. Is the slice of bread visible in the video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CMSB) 

Q. Is the following event visible in the video: 

cook cheddar cheese until they become soft? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

(b) Multiple -speaker in Speech 

… A: Okay. And what are you using? Breast meat? B: Yeah, you 

can use whatever you like, the white meat or the dark meat. 

A:Okay . A: bag with about a third of a cup of flour. B: Each cube 

or a bunch? A: I would do it with several at a time. Get them in 

there. What you're going to do is shake it around, coat them 

really well …

Temporal Alignment (TA) 

Q. When the speech is heard, is the narrated event 

happening at the same time in the video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Temporal F orecasting (TF) 

Q. Relative to the moment when the speech is heard, 

when does the narrated event occur in the video? 

(A) Past (B) Present (C) Future 

Cross -Modal Temporal Binding (CMTB) 

Q. When the speech is heard, what visual action is 

occurring in the video? 

(A) put the seasoned meat in a zip lock bag with flour 

and shake 

(B) add cloves bay leaves thyme parsley and wine to it 

and cook 

(C) season the diced beef pieces with salt and pepper Figure 4. Speaker variability in SVHalluc. We show predictions of Qwen3-Omni [37] , Qwen2.5-Omni [36] , and Video-LLaMA 2 [4] in diverse speaker settings. Temporal Alignment (TA) 

Q. When the speech is heard, is the narrated event 

happening at the same time in the video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Temporal F orecasting (TF) 

Q. Relative to the moment when the speech is heard, 

when does the narrated event occur in the video? 

(A) Past (B) Present (C) Future 

to simmer it until it reduces by about half 

and then let it cool completely 

Cross -Modal Temporal Binding (CMTB) 

Q. When the speech is heard, what visual action is 

occurring in the video? 

(A) place basil leaves on top of the pizza 

(B) cook the sauce in a pan 

(C) spread tomato sauce on the dough 

## …

Global Semantic Alignment (GSA) 

Q. Does the speech describe the visual events in the 

video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Fine -Grained Semantic Alignment (FGSA) bba , b

Q. Is the shrimp visible in the video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

The shrimp should be golden, crispy brown. 

You'll want to place that on a paper towel to 

drain off the excess grease. 

Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CMSB) (bba )

Q. Is the following event visible in the video: place 

burger patties on a paper towel? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

## …

(a) Illumination – Bright 

(b) Illumination – Dusky 

Figure 5. Illumination variability in SVHalluc. We show predictions of Qwen3-Omni [37] , Qwen2.5-Omni [36] , and Video-LLaMA 2 [4] in diverse illumination settings. (a) Fixed Top -down View 

# …

Fine -Grained Semantic Alignment (FGSA) 

Q. Is the tomato puree visible in the video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CSMB) 

Q. Is the following event visible in the video: 

cook tomato puree? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

# …

Global Semantic Alignment (GSA) 

Q. Does the speech describe the visual events in the 

video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Fine -Grained Semantic Alignment (FGSA) 

Q. Is the cilantro visible in the video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CMSB )

Q. Is the following event visible in the video: 

combine cilantro in a bowl? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

(b) Moving Side View 

Then, get your beef mince and throw that in the pan as well, 

along with a couple of major squirts of tomato puree .

…finishing it off with some green cilantro leaves and …

Global Semantic Alignment (GSA) 

Q. Does the speech describe the visual events in the 

video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

logo 

Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CMSB) 

Q. Is the following event visible in the video: 

pour sriracha on the macaroni? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

# …

(c) Object -centric and Human -centric Global Semantic Alignment (GSA) 

Q. Does the speech describe the visual events in the 

video? 

(A) Yes (B) No 

add our dressing and as you're mixing this, you prepped your 

macaroni properly by the time this is ready to serve 

Cross -Modal Semantic Binding (CMSB) 

Q. Is the following event visible in the video: 

pour pepper on the macaroni? 

(A) Yes (B) No Figure 6. Camera viewpoint variability in SVHalluc. We show predictions of Qwen3-Omni [37] , Qwen2.5-Omni [36] , and Video-LLaMA 2 [4] in diverse camera viewpoint settings.